[Amit Varma]: On June 5, 1989, a bunch of tanks in single file rolled down Chang'an Avenue, with Tiananmen
[Amit Varma]: Square behind them. The previous day, protests at Tiananmen Square had been crushed by the
[Amit Varma]: Chinese government, with hundreds if not thousands of people killed. Just one day later, the
[Amit Varma]: streets were empty, except for these massive tanks rolling past. And then, suddenly, a
[Amit Varma]: man dressed in a white shirt and black trousers, holding what appeared to be shopping bags,
[Amit Varma]: walked over in front of the first of those tanks, and just stood there as it advanced
[Amit Varma]: towards him. It stopped just in time. A few seconds passed. Two other tanks stopped behind
[Amit Varma]: the first tank. A fourth one approached from behind. Then that first tank started and swerved
[Amit Varma]: away from the man and tried to go past him. He ran into its path and stood there. The
[Amit Varma]: tank swerved again, the man swerved again. This went on for a bit till the tank just
[Amit Varma]: stopped. The man was three feet away from it at most. It's an iconic photograph, and
[Amit Varma]: there's also an iconic video of it. But we don't know who the man was. And we don't know
[Amit Varma]: what happened to him. 53 years before this, on June 13, 1936, a group of workers gathered
[Amit Varma]: at a shipyard in Hamburg. There was a moment when they all raised their hand in the Nazi
[Amit Varma]: salute, except one man. In another iconic photograph, you see this man in the crowd,
[Amit Varma]: the only man not saluting, as alone as the man 53 years later who we now call Tank Man.
[Amit Varma]: And as I think of these men, a part of me wonders why they did what they did. What is
[Amit Varma]: the point? You can't win. The tank is always stronger than you. The mob is always stronger
[Amit Varma]: than you. The instinct for self-preservation dictates that you keep quiet. It dictates
[Amit Varma]: that the unknown man in China goes home with his shopping bags and empties them on the
[Amit Varma]: kitchen platform and maybe makes himself a cup of tea. The man in the shipyard, he can
[Amit Varma]: raise his arm, he can go with the mob so that he's not the odd one out. But these two people
[Amit Varma]: didn't do that. And we have to ask, what is it that made those men do what they did? And
[Amit Varma]: why do we feel inspired when we look at those photographs? Maybe those men were foolish,
[Amit Varma]: but we think of them today as heroes. Why do we feel that way? Would you have walked
[Amit Varma]: in front of that tank?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My guest today is Aakar Patel, someone I've known
[Amit Varma]: off for many years as an enterprising reporter, an excellent editor, a provocative columnist.
[Amit Varma]: In recent years, though, in addition to all of these, I think of Aakar as a principled
[Amit Varma]: dissenter. Aakar was a journalist through the 90s and aughties, took a break in 2010,
[Amit Varma]: decided at one point to become head of amnesty in India, and after our government clamped
[Amit Varma]: down on amnesty, has been an outspoken dissenter. To me, dissent is the highest form of patriotism.
[Amit Varma]: And Aakar has gone all in. Over the last couple of years, he's written two superb books,
[Amit Varma]: Our Hindu Rashtra, What It Is, How We Got Here, and Price of the Modi Years. He also
[Amit Varma]: has one of my favourite Twitter accounts of all time, where he's mastered a unique form
[Amit Varma]: of satire in a unique voice that is unlike anything else in that space. On some days,
[Amit Varma]: I feel grateful that Narendra Modi exists, because if he didn't, Aakar Patel may not
[Amit Varma]: have been Aakar Patel. Now, Aakar has been on the show before, in 2019, when we discussed
[Amit Varma]: the intellectual foundations of Hindutva, as that episode title was, I'll link it from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. I visited Bangalore recently to record a bunch of episodes, and given how
[Amit Varma]: prolific Aakar has been, it made sense to catch up with him. We spoke about politics,
[Amit Varma]: we spoke about the media, and we spoke about Aakar's passport, which at that point had
[Amit Varma]: been impounded by the government and had been with them for a long time. Well, guess what?
[Amit Varma]: Soon after we had our conversation, Aakar's passport was returned to him. I'm like, wow,
[Amit Varma]: you would have thought someone was listening in. Be that as it may, check out this quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break, which is a commercial for me only, what else is there? And then check
[Amit Varma]: out our conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've enjoyed teaching 21 cohorts of my online course, The
[Amit Varma]: Art of Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction. In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I
[Amit Varma]: share all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises,
[Amit Varma]: much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs. 10,000
[Amit Varma]: GST, or about $150. And registration is now open for my April 2022 cohort. The first webinar
[Amit Varma]: is on Saturday, April 9. So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Aakar, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I recorded a long episode with Abhinandan Sekri in November. And before we started,
[Amit Varma]: we were kind of talking about you, admiringly. And my feeling was that Aakar has reached
[Amit Varma]: that stage of a person who has no more fucks to give. So you just write anything into it.
[Amit Varma]: And you're just, you're just kind of out there. And is that a characterization you'd kind
[Guest]: of agree with? And if so, how did you get here?
[Guest]: I don't know if that's true. And if it's true, I should be really worried. I do give a lot
[Amit Varma]: of fucks. I think no more fucks to give in a sense
[Guest]: of fear. No more fear. So I'm not really sure about how I got here. But certainly, it is
[Guest]: a fact that once you've faced what the state can do to you as an individual, and you've
[Guest]: gone through it once, the fear of that diminishes in some sense, because you know exactly what
[Guest]: it is comprised of, that they can do this to you. And I have gone through that quite
[Guest]: a bit in the last four or five years. So that's now fine. That is sort of acceptable.
[Guest]: The other thing is that I run off at the mouth. So I think that because I find using Twitter
[Guest]: so entertaining for myself, I tend to do it a lot more than I should be doing. And because
[Guest]: purely in terms of volume, there is so much material, a lot of it might be seen as flying
[Amit Varma]: off the handle, which it probably is. I'm struck with a phrase you said that after
[Amit Varma]: having been through all of this, that's now fine. You know, so is that something you're
[Amit Varma]: comfortable talking about? Because of course, you were harassed when you were in charge
[Amit Varma]: of amnesty and all those cases happened and all that. And even now, you are constantly
[Amit Varma]: being harassed. I believe your passport was impounded and all of that. Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it just sounds like so incredibly, incredibly traumatic for me. Is that something you're
[Amit Varma]: comfortable talking about what that what happened, what that process was like?
[Guest]: Two separate things with amnesty, what happened was a series of raids, and the accounts were
[Guest]: frozen the following morning, we had people in the office, we were not allowed to move
[Guest]: for many hours till about 11 o'clock in the night. The worry always was how do we keep
[Guest]: the operation going, because this sort of action had been taken against other entities,
[Guest]: including Greenpeace. So, we knew what it was to anticipate. When it finally happened,
[Guest]: the lack of competence from the state showed and so we were able to get relief from the
[Guest]: courts fairly quickly the first time. The second time it happened on the same set of
[Guest]: transactions, this was the CBI coming in, we had raids by the MHA, the CBI, the Enforcement
[Guest]: Directorate. The second time also, there was a lack of competence, this time the ET charged
[Guest]: us with money laundering. But the relief from the courts was only partial. So, at that my
[Guest]: my term had ended in November. The people who came after me felt that it was too difficult
[Guest]: to be able to carry on with that. So, they felt it was better to suspend operations.
[Guest]: Facing the state, I think, is slightly different for those who face the upper echelons of the
[Guest]: bureaucracy. So, when the CBI comes to you, it's not like inspector type person, it's
[Guest]: somebody fairly higher up. And they tend to talk to you in the way that people of that
[Guest]: level of education and that level of exposure will. The ED was much rougher, with me at
[Guest]: least. They were fairly accusatory in terms of why are you doing this kind of work. And
[Guest]: it occurred to me that the language that they used was pretty much the same as somebody
[Guest]: who would not be acquainted with the wider world would actually use. So, yeah. In terms
[Guest]: of purely harassment, there wasn't that much. I mean, there's continual summons. So, then
[Guest]: you go. Once you figure out that that's the way it works, when they call you, you go.
[Guest]: But with no resources, that becomes slightly more difficult. So, these days, not having
[Guest]: made too much money over the last several years, it's not that easy. Having your passport
[Guest]: impounded is, I mean, but it's the two years of COVID. So, I mean, where the heck would
[Guest]: you go in any case? So, it's fine for them to keep it. On the personal side, it was,
[Guest]: there was the possibility of jail till I got bail. So, I didn't have to go there. It might
[Guest]: still happen. I don't know. Because there is always the fear that somebody else files
[Guest]: a case for something you said or something you are accused of having said. That's the
[Guest]: nature of living in this country at this point in time. I think that you either put your
[Guest]: head down and say, fine, I'm not going to engage with this. But many people can't do
[Guest]: that. They have to engage with what they see around them. I can't look away from what it
[Guest]: is. And that means that necessarily you get into trouble sometimes. But that's the price
[Guest]: of being in this country at this point in time, which many people are paying a much
[Guest]: higher price than before. I'm one of the fortunate ones. I'm not inside. I can still write. Publisher's
[Guest]: dead though. Books will no longer be printed. But I suppose it's the same experience writers
[Guest]: would have in any part of the world with an authoritarian leader who doesn't like dissent
[Guest]: and whose supporters see dissent, any kind of it, as a direct insult to his greatness,
[Guest]: which is why they act. And that is the reality of India post-2014.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, your publisher is dead, but we all hope that they come back to life in
[Amit Varma]: some way or the other. So let's see how that goes. So I'm reminded of this book I read
[Amit Varma]: called Exit Voice Loyalty by Albert Hirschman, where he says that when you are in an unpleasant
[Amit Varma]: situation, whether it is within an organization or within a country or whatever, you have
[Amit Varma]: three options, like the easiest option is just loyalty, you stay loyal. Another option
[Amit Varma]: is voice, that you voice out whatever the problem is, if you know, and how to make things
[Amit Varma]: better. And the third option is exit, that you just leave, right. And now within corporations
[Amit Varma]: and all the way markets work, exit is possible, that you don't like a job in a company, you
[Amit Varma]: look for another job, you know, and if you're doing something, which is kind of if the market
[Amit Varma]: is there for that, you kind of get out. And voice is always sort of dangerous. Now, you
[Amit Varma]: know, at a national level, now what happens is that many of us who may not be happy with
[Amit Varma]: what's going on, we've got two effective options, which is exit or voice. And this came to my
[Amit Varma]: mind, because I have been like, it's damn disturbing, Aakar, I have spoken to so many
[Amit Varma]: people who like me, years ago, decades ago, two decades ago, in the 90s, made a conscious
[Amit Varma]: choice that we will stay in India, we can go, but we will stay in India, because this
[Amit Varma]: is where we want to be. This is our comfort zone, it's our home, we will stay. And without
[Amit Varma]: exception, they're all they've either left or they're thinking of leaving, right, which
[Amit Varma]: is heartbreaking, because these are not the kind of guys who would have left anyway. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm thinking, these are the privileged types, that they can leave, so they leave, most people
[Amit Varma]: can't leave. And most people can't even are afraid of the voice angle also, because for
[Amit Varma]: all kinds of reasons, right. And therefore, I sometimes think that there's another kind
[Amit Varma]: of exit that happens there, which is not an exit out of the country, but an exit into
[Amit Varma]: yourself, like a psychological thing where you become in denial, and you say, I don't
[Amit Varma]: want to, you know, almost a kind of effective loyalty, but not really. But you're just like,
[Amit Varma]: I'll do my own thing, you know, maybe not my circus, not my monkeys kind of thing. And
[Amit Varma]: I'll do my own thing and find people are being lynched, and girls aren't being allowed to
[Amit Varma]: enter schools, and that's somewhere else. And I'll just kind of focus on my own life.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, along this framework, how do you think of things like, of course, you can't
[Amit Varma]: exit because it took your passport. But if you were to, on the question of voice, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you are someone who's gone down that route that I'll, you know, I care, I'll keep
[Amit Varma]: saying what I have to say. And obviously, you know, many, many people like that, in
[Amit Varma]: our circles, who are exactly the same, beyond the point, what happens, you know, have you
[Amit Varma]: seen people who have just become silent, because what's the point, nothing's going to change.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact is that that's rational, because nothing is going to change in a larger scheme
[Amit Varma]: of things, you know, some people might say, Oh, I'll play the longer game, I'll just stay
[Amit Varma]: at it, there needs to be someone who's speaking. So what are sort of your thoughts on this
[Amit Varma]: as over the years, we've, you know, when we last spoke in our last episode was in early
[Amit Varma]: 2019, before the elections. And you said, Oh, there's going to be a hung parliament,
[Amit Varma]: I think, right. So, yeah, you said, I think there's going to be a hung parliament. No,
[Amit Varma]: it's too late. It's a it's on the record. And so I think many of us had more hope than
[Amit Varma]: we do now many of us saw a greater point in actually speaking up than we might do now.
[Guest]: So you know, what are your thoughts? I think that most people don't have a voice or don't
[Guest]: have a sufficiently loud voice. This has changed with social media, where if you have if you
[Guest]: can generate content of reasonable quality, you will find a fairly large audience for
[Guest]: much of your content. Those of us who have a formal voice or have been given a formal
[Guest]: voice as you and I have, where over the years, we've been given platforms to be able to say
[Guest]: what it is that we want. I think that it's important for that set, especially to be able
[Guest]: to use it. And I think that it is being used. What is striking about the formal media space
[Guest]: is that there is an informal media space, which is social media, but in the formal space,
[Guest]: while the industry has tilted towards Mr. Modi and towards his majoritarianism, I would
[Guest]: say a lot of people who could have either exited or could have turned inward and say,
[Guest]: you know, not my circus and not my monkeys have chosen to speak. And I don't think it's
[Guest]: a small number. I think the reason why the media dominance is stressed on by this government
[Guest]: is that it sees, it suspects, and I think it is right, that what comes from the other
[Guest]: side, even though it might not be amplified too much, is powerful. And so I'm in very
[Guest]: good company, I think that we have a lot of people who may or may not be part of the media
[Guest]: system, but have a formal voice, such as people in civil society, who because of social media
[Guest]: have become formal spaces, where they can command authority in terms of their reach.
[Guest]: I suppose it's also a question of a community. Many of us can't take the options that you
[Guest]: picked, two of them, because they belong to the persecuted, that for them, it's personal,
[Guest]: that it is even if it is not them who is being disrobed or who's being kicked out of their
[Guest]: prayer spaces or being told not to sell this or being beaten up for being who they are,
[Guest]: it is the sense of fraternity that they will feel will be very powerful. So for them, I
[Guest]: don't think it's possible to, I can't speak for them, but I suspect that for them it won't
[Guest]: be possible to either exit or to look inward and say, I'm not going to engage with it.
[Guest]: But for many of us, I think that we still believe, and I think we are right to believe
[Guest]: that that space is actually available, that India is not a competently run authoritarian
[Guest]: state. It's not like China, where you will not come out of jail till you're on your knees
[Guest]: and you say you're not going to do it again, and maybe not even after that. We have a little
[Guest]: bit of space available, despite a fairly pliant judiciary, despite a fairly empowered mob,
[Guest]: to be able to say some things and to be able to get resonance and response for that. So
[Guest]: I think that that quality of our country where there is so much chaos that even tyranny does
[Guest]: not operate in lockstep fashion and the mob really is not able to efficiently control
[Guest]: our voices, that space is there. Many of us sense it. Some of us get into trouble at some
[Guest]: points because of it, but it is there. I think that those who choose to engage with the polity
[Guest]: and of course, engagement should always be from the positive sense, that people say what
[Guest]: they do for the most part because they want things to be better. It is the case that we
[Guest]: have in India today in 2022, enough freedom to be able to, just enough freedom to be able
[Guest]: to say some things. And I think that those who choose either to exit, whether physically
[Guest]: or intellectually and morally, are missing out on that because certainly they are doing
[Guest]: so not because they like what they are seeing around them, but they believe it's safer for
[Guest]: them or they believe it's more comfortable for them to be able to disengage. I think
[Guest]: that they are missing out on something very valuable. I found that engaging with my fellow
[Guest]: country women and men on these substantial issues in these times is the most rewarding
[Guest]: thing I have done in my life, though I'm not making any money out of it. And it's rewarding
[Guest]: in ways that few things ever can be. I think that the sense of solidarity, the sense of
[Guest]: meaning that you have when you speak for things that are so meaningful to so many people,
[Guest]: so real, is very different, I think, and very new to me at least. I'm quite pleased that
[Guest]: though we've had very difficult times in the last two and a half years, these have also
[Guest]: been times that have given the opportunity for this maybe not insignificant number of
[Guest]: people to gather around values, as I think has not been the case for a very long time
[Amit Varma]: in this country. I think what I've also seen, and I think it's an observation I'd make about
[Amit Varma]: – it's an observation I'd make a little more hesitatingly about the country as a whole,
[Amit Varma]: but it's certainly true of social media, is that what you see on social media are these
[Amit Varma]: shrill, vocal minorities, but the vast silent majorities are not quite like that. And there
[Amit Varma]: are ways to sort of reach out and connect. And I wonder if at the level of a country,
[Amit Varma]: it might just be possible that there are many more people with us than we think, and those
[Amit Varma]: connections and become sort of valuable. And, but, you know, I understand what you're saying
[Amit Varma]: that there is a space, and that space for dissent might be there because of inertia,
[Amit Varma]: dissent might be there because those in power feel English speaking elites like us are not
[Amit Varma]: important enough. And that space can shrink very fast. Like, you know, if the emergency
[Amit Varma]: was on, for example, if this was 1976, I'm sure both of us would be in jail, right? That
[Amit Varma]: space can shrink very fast. And other spaces have shrunk very fast, right? Especially as
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out for Muslims, which is, you know, which has been their locus so far. But,
[Amit Varma]: you know, if they also decide at some point that, okay, let's get down to it and teach
[Amit Varma]: these elite liberals a lesson instead of ignoring them, that it can shrink very fast. And in
[Amit Varma]: many ways, I think about sort of the process being the punishment, that it is not necessary
[Amit Varma]: that an Amit Shah sends a powerful state after you. It is, you know, some random guy somewhere
[Amit Varma]: can go to a police station. I mean, you've pointed out how you had some Suomoto case
[Amit Varma]: filed against you by your local police station, and then that process becomes a punishment.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, no matter how skilled you are at avoiding Twitter notifications and all
[Amit Varma]: that, there was a time where people were claiming you were a Muslim as if that is a bad thing
[Amit Varma]: to be and calling you Akar Amit Patel and all of that. And that's also got to be disturbing
[Amit Varma]: at some level. So, you know, one, has this stuff affected you as it's happened in your
[Amit Varma]: own time? And two, if the space should suddenly constrict, at what point do you see a point
[Amit Varma]: where you like, do they have to kind of physically lock you up and shut you up for you to kind
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, stop? Or is there a point where you can think of, you can say, right, look,
[Amit Varma]: okay, for my family or for whatever, and it's not practical, let's lie low for a while?
[Guest]: I foresee a continuation of what we have seen in the past eight years, we are going to enter
[Guest]: year nine very soon, rather than a deterioration. And I think part of that is structural, that
[Guest]: India engages with the world, and no country can be fully sovereign in the 21st century,
[Guest]: you are dependent on country X for something, some other countries dependent on you for
[Guest]: something. No country is fully sovereign, which means that you, at some point, nations
[Guest]: have to follow broad rules. We are sitting down on a day, just hours after this has been
[Guest]: violated. But that is exceptional. I think that for the most part, you have to do things
[Guest]: in a particular way. Broadly speaking, I think India continues to tell the world that we
[Guest]: are this liberal democracy, liberal, not as defined by Twitter, but liberal as defined
[Guest]: by a constitution that it says that it looks at the individual not through the prism of
[Guest]: faith, but through the prism of their humanity and their citizenship. Into this, the BJP
[Guest]: has introduced the element of faith, that using this secular carapace, this Nehruvian
[Guest]: carapace, which overarches the polity, they have introduced laws that go after Muslims
[Guest]: specifically, whether it is on interfaith marriage, whether it is on what they eat,
[Guest]: or through policies like what they may wear, where they may pray, where they may not pray.
[Guest]: But because that carapace exists externally, it's difficult for India to be able to continue
[Guest]: doing what it is doing beyond a point, which is why I foresee only what is going on being
[Guest]: the case without any deepening of it. I could be wrong. And it's our vulnerability to the
[Guest]: external world with whom we have relationships, with whom we have dependencies, that ensure
[Guest]: that we haven't gone down a far nastier path than we have chosen to go down. That is the
[Guest]: reality. And I think that that will not change. We will see what has been going on continuing.
[Guest]: I don't see it deepening. And there are structural reasons why I think that this will fail, not
[Guest]: from the point of view of pure optimism. My sense is that we have reached the period from
[Guest]: where things will get better. And I don't think that that time is too far off. So while
[Guest]: it's entirely possible that I'm wrong, and things do get worse, and they will go after
[Guest]: not just Muslims, but other people and, you know, sort of brutalize them the way that
[Guest]: they are doing, they're doing to Muslims now. I don't foresee that happening for structural
[Guest]: reasons. And I foresee that things will improve on the on the rights front, in short order,
[Guest]: but not too much longer than five or seven years.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I've been saying for a long time that things will get worse before they get better.
[Amit Varma]: But sometimes I wonder if they will kind of get better at all. You know, there is that
[Amit Varma]: old quote, in fact, you begin the last chapter of our Hindu Rashtra with that quote by Martin
[Amit Varma]: Luther King about the arc of history is long, but it bends towards justice. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I wonder if that is naive, because we have a low sample size history isn't really
[Amit Varma]: that long, how the hell do we know it bends towards justice, maybe we're just being optimistic,
[Amit Varma]: maybe it doesn't bend towards justice.
[Guest]: So if you look at the last 150 years, it's hard to think of a single battle that liberals
[Guest]: have lost. They've won everything from slavery, to the rights of women to vote, adult suffrage,
[Guest]: on torture, on colonialism, on war, like, it's very hard to think of an issue on which
[Guest]: what is called the traditional right or the conservative has won big seed space continually.
[Guest]: But this is only visible if you if we step back and look on time as being in maybe a
[Guest]: century and a half rather than years. Somebody who looks at India, from the lens of 30 years
[Guest]: might say things have become very bad, and they have. But I think that the arc is not
[Guest]: something that the shift is not really possible. I think it can only move towards justice.
[Guest]: Because humanity is good in a way that is difficult to introduce malign influence, which
[Guest]: remains for too long. It does come and it does stay sometimes. But it's not permanent.
[Guest]: I think the permanent shift is towards goodness, more freedom, more rights, more understanding
[Guest]: and, yeah, so I think he got that right. If, if you look at it from the long point of view,
[Guest]: and I think I see the same happening here as well, not not just in our country. But
[Guest]: I think across the world that the next 20 years will be very good for us that because
[Guest]: we have so many things to unite us as, as a planet, the fact that we are all endangered
[Guest]: by one thing, the climate shift, the recognition that, you know, in most countries that war
[Guest]: is not the way to resolve issues, as we've seen in the last 30 years, very little violence,
[Guest]: which is a state on state. The changes we are seeing in science that what what we are
[Guest]: bringing in in terms of from rocketry to intelligence to, to the shift that is on us on labour,
[Guest]: I think that will produce very good things. The causes might be bad. I think that what
[Guest]: India is facing today, whether for mismanagement, or just the fact that we are a very large
[Guest]: nation of very poor people at this point in history, with so many people out of work,
[Guest]: there are 5 crore fewer people working in India today than were working in 2014. I don't
[Guest]: think that this is an issue that's sufficiently spoken about. But this is government data
[Guest]: that the labour force participation rate fell, started falling, and went from 52%, which
[Guest]: it was in 2014 to 40%. And this is before the pandemic, it's not really the last two
[Guest]: years that have done the damage. But what this will produce is a state that looks at
[Guest]: its citizens with much more sympathy than has been the case in the past. So, I believe
[Guest]: that the arc of history does bend towards justice. And I think it will continue to.
[Amit Varma]: And you referred to recent events, I should point out to my listeners that we are recording
[Amit Varma]: this on Feb 25. And the whole Russia, Ukraine thing happened yesterday. And yeah, and like
[Amit Varma]: you said, and like you've pointed out, I mean, I've done tons of episodes on the economy
[Amit Varma]: before the pandemic, and we were already in dire straits. So we obviously only made worse
[Amit Varma]: by COVID. I'm glad to see you so optimistic about the arc of history. Because I think
[Amit Varma]: yeah, sure. I mean, if you step back and see the last 150 years, good things have happened.
[Amit Varma]: If you step a little further back and see 3000 years, you say 150 years is just a blip,
[Amit Varma]: you know, who knows. But so I did this recent episode with Rupur Dhawan Singh and Adil Hussain
[Amit Varma]: on this excellent book where they've reproduced Nehru's debates with four people. And one
[Amit Varma]: of them is Jinnah. And the reason this reminded me was that at the same time as one realizes
[Amit Varma]: that things change very fast, one also realizes that things fester very long. And there is
[Amit Varma]: an in that fascinating debate which Nehru and Jinnah are happening and how that their
[Amit Varma]: book is structured is they write an introductory essay, but then it's Nehru's words and Jinnah's
[Amit Varma]: words speaking for themselves. And it's a fascinating debate. And Jinnah is really not
[Amit Varma]: at his best in that particular debate. He's written much better elsewhere. And in that
[Amit Varma]: debate, Nehru keeps berating him that I want to focus on poverty, I want to focus on this
[Amit Varma]: and this is happening in the 30s. And I don't want to talk about the communal question.
[Amit Varma]: The communal question is an issue only for you elites, right? And there I feel was one
[Amit Varma]: place when Nehru was clearly wrong. It was not just an elite issue, Jinnah's fears of
[Amit Varma]: what a Hindu majority may do. And I think over there, he used the term Hindu Raj in
[Amit Varma]: one place. And Nehru was like, what are you talking about? How can there be a Hindu Raj?
[Amit Varma]: And there I feel that, you know, Jinnah's fears were justified. His belief in the communal
[Amit Varma]: divide as it were his words, the communal question as it were his words, were borne
[Amit Varma]: out in a sense by partition and Nehru himself may have realized that he got a little bit
[Amit Varma]: wrong. And I think that many liberals have made a similar mistake to Nehru, thinking
[Amit Varma]: that hey, we'll put a constitution in place and we'll put these liberal values in place
[Amit Varma]: and we'll put all these rights in there. And then there'll be no problem and it'll go away.
[Amit Varma]: And I tend to side with Mahatma Gandhi's view on this, where Gandhi's view was that, listen,
[Amit Varma]: you have to change society from the bottom up. Even Ambedkar realized this when he called
[Amit Varma]: the constitution a topsoil, right? So, and what you see, and this is something that has
[Amit Varma]: festered, you know, I did an episode with Akshay Mukul on his great book on the Gita
[Amit Varma]: Press. And one of the realizations there is that all of this has been there from, you
[Amit Varma]: know, has been an inherent part of our society from before. You look at the sales of the
[Amit Varma]: Gita Press books, for example, you know, things like Love Jihad, even if it's a new term,
[Amit Varma]: but things like Love Jihad and Cow Slaughter and all of that were live political issues
[Amit Varma]: in the 20s and all of that, right? And we've kind of reached this space where now you could
[Amit Varma]: say society has caught up with politics, where in a sense, while I don't think we were ever
[Amit Varma]: much of a republic, you could say that we probably become more of a democracy because
[Amit Varma]: this is how the people feel. And our politics now reflects what our sort of society is.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I look at that arc, and I don't see what is there to make me hopeful, because
[Amit Varma]: the values that the constitution laid out, I mean, I know there are books like A People's
[Amit Varma]: Constitution by Rohit De, which, you know, argue otherwise. And for India, you know,
[Amit Varma]: everything you say the opposite is true, as old cliche goes. But I look at that arc, and
[Amit Varma]: I think that nothing has changed. We had this thing which festered, festered, festered,
[Amit Varma]: you tried to brush it away, you tried to be in denial about it. And the elites basically
[Amit Varma]: ran the country in an incompetent way. But now that that has kind of changed. This is
[Amit Varma]: what we always were. And this has now been amplified.
[Guest]: That's very true. I think that what Ambedkar observed in terms of the constitution being
[Guest]: a document that didn't necessarily reflect the society on the issue of caste has also
[Guest]: turned out to be true on the issue of communalism. There's absolutely no question that if you
[Guest]: look across India today, where we have 28 states, no Muslim chief minister, 15 states
[Guest]: in India, no Muslim minister at all, 10 states, one Muslim minister normally given a minority
[Guest]: affairs, a ruling party with 303 Lok Sabha MPs, none of whom is a Muslim, which had 282
[Guest]: Lok Sabha MPs, none of whom was a Muslim. It is stark that the issue on which India
[Guest]: was partitioned, which is that one community saying that we want legally guaranteed means
[Guest]: of representation, which was denied to them, which led to partition. It would be very difficult
[Guest]: in 2022 to look across the landscape and deny what it is that you've said. That this is,
[Guest]: as you've said, a society meeting its politics and agreeing that leave the constitution aside,
[Guest]: this is who we want to be. And we are comfortable with this. Is this sustainable? I would say
[Guest]: no. I don't think there are too many instances of democracies across the world. I would say
[Guest]: there is none, where 85% continually vote against 15% for them being the 15%. It doesn't
[Guest]: make sense. We are an outlier on many other issues. So maybe it is the case that we will
[Guest]: continue to do this to ourselves. I don't think that that will be the case. And I don't
[Guest]: think it will be too long before this shifts. And the reason I'm saying this is that at
[Guest]: some point, the evidence cannot be denied. It is in front of you. And for a polity that
[Guest]: is coming into year nine, the evidence is there now. I don't think it's easy for people
[Guest]: to look away from what has been done to this country over the last eight or nine years
[Guest]: and say that it is good. You could be happy about the fact that a bunch of people are
[Guest]: being brutalized. That's fine. And I'm sure there are many of us who do feel that. Are
[Guest]: there enough of that lot to make sure that this continues into eternity or at least for
[Guest]: the next couple of decades? I would say no. It's highly improbable that given the performance.
[Guest]: Would it be different if they were competent and authoritarian? I don't know. And it would
[Guest]: not be easy to tell because you would not know whether the vote is coming for the competence
[Guest]: or for the authoritarianism. But right now you've got incompetence and you've got a kind
[Guest]: of brutality, which is the primary selling point. I don't think the prime minister goes
[Guest]: out and says that I've changed the rate of GDP growth and we're going to become the next
[Guest]: China because we're not. He doesn't say that I'm going to get you a good job because he's
[Guest]: not. What does continue is the narrative that we've seen the latest one being in Karnataka,
[Guest]: the state we are in with what it is that Muslim women cannot be allowed to wear. Is this sustainable?
[Guest]: I would say no. And I don't think I'm using my emotional side here. It's not possible.
[Guest]: It's highly improbable that such a polity continues in a democratic space. And I foresee
[Guest]: it changing not before long.
[Amit Varma]: No. So it's interesting that you said the evidence can't be denied. And of course, you
[Amit Varma]: wrote a book full of the evidence. And that's what I rather naively felt. Like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: when demonetization happened. And I was very sure they're going to get massacred in UP
[Amit Varma]: because I thought, you know, the largest assault on property rights in human history, the poor
[Amit Varma]: have suffered far more. How can they possibly win an election now? Right. And they swept
[Amit Varma]: it and not, you know, obviously, there are little factors like schadenfreude, the poor
[Amit Varma]: thought the rich were hurt more and all that, which, but I, you know, I don't give, I think
[Amit Varma]: what has happened is that one people have always in India because of 70 plus years of
[Amit Varma]: misgovernance become almost apathetic of the role of governance in their lives. They assume
[Amit Varma]: that everything is broken and it will remain broken. They exist and they do what they do
[Amit Varma]: despite the state. And therefore, they don't make that link between necessarily between
[Amit Varma]: their vote and the governance that they are getting. And therefore, I'm not sure how much
[Amit Varma]: of this evidence really matters. And part of it is, of course, muddied by COVID because
[Amit Varma]: now it's easy to build narratives and say, hey, this happened and at least Modiji saved
[Amit Varma]: your life and whatever other nonsense there is. So we'll see how that kind of plays out
[Amit Varma]: because I feel that we've sort of entered a space where I don't know if reality matters.
[Amit Varma]: It's all narrative battles. And when you think about it, no one person within himself actually
[Amit Varma]: sees reality. They see their own limited reality in their limited circles. Figures like what
[Amit Varma]: GDP growth may be or what is women participation in the workforce and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: They are abstract things. They're not real to me. I see what is real to me and what is
[Amit Varma]: real to me. If I'm poor and if I'm, you know, is that everything's been, it's been screwed
[Amit Varma]: forever. And then that kind of tribalism kind of kicks in. And I wonder if this is a realization
[Amit Varma]: that the other parties have also come to because the thing that dismays me even more than the
[Amit Varma]: way our government behaves is that all the other parties seem to think that this Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: vote, this Hindu vote is a big deal, that they have to cater to it. One guy will win
[Amit Varma]: and do, you know, have recitations of Hanuman Chalisa. Another, you know, the Congress boasted
[Amit Varma]: when the court judgment on Babri Masjid came out that it was after, you know, Priyanka
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi said, it was my father who opened these gates. So there seems to be this understanding
[Amit Varma]: that the core issue of today is this Hindutva thing that you can't go against that and whatever
[Amit Varma]: else you do, like whatever AAP says about good governance and schools and all that,
[Amit Varma]: it is on the margins. But this, this Hindu vote thing is a given thing. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in an idealistic way, I would like to believe that we contain multitudes. There are many
[Amit Varma]: aspects to our nature. You know, even if there is one person who doesn't like Muslims and
[Amit Varma]: who doesn't want them to eat beef, he also wants jobs, he also wants a better future
[Amit Varma]: for his children. But then I see the political parties who would surely understand this better
[Amit Varma]: than me. And they're not trying to appeal to those aspects. They are keeping in mind
[Amit Varma]: that. So what's your feeling on this? Are the parties showing a lack of imagination?
[Guest]: No, I think that politicians understand the electorate, by which I mean the population
[Guest]: better than most of us, better than all of us, I would say. And this is purely because
[Guest]: of the amount of contact they have, mass contact and regular mass contact. And so if they're
[Guest]: doing something, it has to be on the basis of something that they know. It's not, they're
[Guest]: not operating on instinct. They are actually functioning on knowledge. Do I expect that
[Guest]: a chart on employment or on GDP growth or whatever else might convince somebody to shift
[Guest]: their vote in a moment of epiphany or knowledge? I don't think so. I think that all of us as
[Guest]: a species, for some reason, operate and decide things often on hope and change, which tends
[Guest]: to be narratives that are common to democratic politics around the world. And hope and change
[Guest]: is hope for something which is different from this and change from something which is different
[Guest]: from this. And I think that what this is, is not necessarily data. Because as you said,
[Guest]: most of us really don't know or cannot even be able to comprehend what it is that GDP
[Guest]: growth rate means. What does it actually mean? I have no idea. In a part of the world where
[Guest]: consumption is limited to 15% of the economy and the vast multitude only consumes food
[Guest]: and a bit of water and a bit of power and a bit of 4G and nothing else. What does GDP
[Guest]: growth even mean? I really don't know. So, I don't think that it will be the facts by
[Guest]: themselves that produce the change. I think it is the reality that the facts are communicating
[Guest]: that hope and change will come out of. And to believe that it will not, that this will
[Guest]: not be the case, is to not be empirical. I think we will have to look at many decades
[Guest]: of democratic nations and conclude that we are totally different from this, that we that
[Guest]: what we, we will remain democratic in the sense that we will come to the booth and vote,
[Guest]: but we will almost never vote for anything other than hatred. I think that's what separates
[Guest]: the real Hindutva of the BJP from the fraud one of the Congress and Kejriwal. Theirs is
[Guest]: a defensive one. It doesn't do what real Hindutva does, which is attack. It goes after the minorities,
[Guest]: the three things that made this party great. Muslims shouldn't keep that mosque, Muslims
[Guest]: shouldn't keep their autonomy, Muslims shouldn't keep their personal law. This that these people
[Guest]: don't have. They might wear a janeu and they might go to a temple. That's not really Hindutva.
[Guest]: It's not, it's not Hindutva at all, actually. Hindutva is the desire of people to actively,
[Guest]: legally, politically exclude and brutalize minorities, especially Muslims. And that is,
[Guest]: if we are saying that has permanent appeal, I believe we would be either very wrong, which
[Guest]: I think we are, or we would be very different from the rest of humanity, which I don't think
[Amit Varma]: we are. So I by your point that there might be an
[Amit Varma]: active Hindutva as it were and a passive Hinduness. But at the same time, I think of Kejriwal
[Amit Varma]: when 370 was repealed, he put out a tweet celebrating it saying it's a good thing for
[Amit Varma]: the people of Kashmir. You know, he equivocated on CAA and, you know, at no point did he sort
[Amit Varma]: of support the protesters and all of that. So, you know, in our earlier episode, you
[Amit Varma]: had very eloquently said something that you argued in your book and that stayed with me,
[Amit Varma]: is that if you think about Hindutva today, everything by which you define them is by
[Amit Varma]: what they are against, which is basically Muslims, right? There is nothing that they
[Amit Varma]: are for, right? Now, the thing is, I also then wonder what are these other parties for?
[Amit Varma]: We don't see enough of an articulation of that. What are the principles that you actually
[Amit Varma]: stand for? What is your vision for a better India? There will occasionally be lofty rhetoric,
[Amit Varma]: but when these fault lines open up, like Kashmir, like CAA and so on, one doesn't really get
[Amit Varma]: that. A lot of the time, of course, they will say the right thing simply because they are
[Amit Varma]: opposing something that is wrong. But apart from that, one really wonders, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one conclusion that I have come to is that we think of, so many of us think of 2014 as
[Amit Varma]: a dividing line in two ways, where the BJP and so on will behave as if history ended
[Amit Varma]: at 2014, nothing happened after it. So everything is Nehru and Indira and this and that. And
[Amit Varma]: after 2014, you don't need to discuss shit that has gone wrong. But the other side, which
[Amit Varma]: is the opposition, will behave as if nothing happened before 2014, right? Where you are
[Amit Varma]: not going to talk about, you know, everything that went wrong in the past. You know, for
[Amit Varma]: example, you argue, you know, people talk about the sedition law and the way Modi is
[Amit Varma]: using it. But the fact is, it was declared unconstitutional in 1950. It was Nehru who
[Amit Varma]: brought it back with the First Amendment. And, you know, when Sanjay Gandhi's birthday
[Amit Varma]: comes around, and you'll find it this year also, whenever it comes around, all the Congress
[Amit Varma]: Party official handles will be treating what a great guy he was, you know, there is no
[Amit Varma]: recognition of, you know, all of that. So, and it's so easy to kind of be virtuous in
[Amit Varma]: opposition as well. I mean, and there are other reasons why I'm kind of, you know, sort
[Amit Varma]: of pessimistic on several margins, and we'll go into them. But what is what what would
[Guest]: be your response to this?
[Guest]: Many things here. I think firstly, Kejriwal's constituency has a bigger component of the
[Guest]: urban middle class than most other large parties. And he's a large party only because of geography
[Guest]: and where he is rather than purely the number of voters. So, I'm not surprised that he would
[Guest]: take the opposition on Kashmir that he did. I think he's using the same thing as a visit
[Guest]: to a temple or being seen in a general event. And once again, I suspect and I think I'm
[Guest]: right that this is a defensive thing. And why is it defensive? I think that these parties
[Guest]: are operating, this is your this is coming to your second point, they are operating at
[Guest]: a time when the narrative dominance of the BJP is absolute. So, they feel compelled to
[Guest]: do things and not talk about either the economy or the GDP because they are forced to speak
[Guest]: of specific things. Is this how politics and the language of politics was in 2003? I would
[Guest]: say no. From both the BJP and from the opposition, the language was different. It's not as if
[Guest]: the BJP didn't want to go after Muslims then it did, but it didn't know how to and it didn't
[Guest]: know I think Modi gave them a clarity of voice and a clarity of mission, which was lacking
[Guest]: in the past. So long as the narrative dominance is what it is, you will find the parties in
[Guest]: the opposition compelled to at least sort of address that bit before trying to talk
[Guest]: about other things. Should parties talk about how bad they were in the past? I would probably
[Guest]: say no, like there's no reason to politics is about the future and about optimism and
[Guest]: hope. Should they defy people like Sanjay Gandhi? Definitely not. I think that's dumb.
[Guest]: And I think that that shows that they haven't learned the lessons that they should have.
[Guest]: Look at Putin, somebody who's barely literate, dropped out of school after class 10, given
[Guest]: charge and did so much damage. Arvind Narayan has written a very fine book called India's
[Guest]: undeclared emergency, where he, from the first chapter chronicles what happened in those
[Guest]: two years. Substantial damage. I think that it will be very difficult to argue that that
[Guest]: was a period, we were in any way different from what we are facing today from a pliant
[Guest]: judiciary, no habeas, people locked up, forcibly sterilized, for God's sake, kicked out of
[Guest]: their homes. It was not very different in terms of the damage the state could do. And
[Guest]: there is no question that when we move on from where we are today from the BJP, whether
[Guest]: it is the party itself or a change in the party that says that, okay, we will no longer
[Guest]: focus on these things. And we'll move on to some other things. We will need to have a
[Guest]: new agreement within society, informally, at least, that we will not continue doing
[Guest]: what it is that we have in the past. I think that will come. And the reason I say that
[Guest]: is because that is the nature of democratic politics, that you have to go back every five
[Guest]: years and ask people a question and they have to give you an answer. And within that exchange,
[Guest]: I think we will find a more normalized way of functioning in our politics rather than
[Guest]: being nasty to ourselves all the time, as has been the case in the past, I would completely
[Guest]: agree and is the case today.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when talking about current times, I often argue that we really have three problems
[Amit Varma]: and there's a proximate problem. And then there are two deeper problems that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: remain with us and, you know, cause me to be so pessimistic. The proximate problem is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, the government in power, right? Modi and Shah and whatever is happening and
[Amit Varma]: the proximate problem has been there since 2014. And we've seen what's going on. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, many people believe that proximate problem is the only problem that if the government
[Amit Varma]: changes, you'll be fine. And I think that ignores the two deeper problems. Now, one
[Amit Varma]: of those deeper problems is what we already discussed, which is the nature of our society.
[Amit Varma]: If our society is fundamentally illiberal, if our society is full of people who are bigoted
[Amit Varma]: and misogynistic and hate Muslims and all of that, then, you know, where is the hope?
[Amit Varma]: The other deeper problem is the oppressive state, right? And the oppressive state was,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, hardwired into us. We took over the oppressive state from the British, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the policeman state as one constitutionalist called it during those debates. We looked
[Amit Varma]: at it from the point of view of a policeman. And that oppressive state, that colonial state,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, remains a problem. Josie Joseph has a book about how it's been used and his
[Amit Varma]: book is not just about the Modi era, it goes back to way before. It is the way that it
[Amit Varma]: is. You know, all of many of these people who were arrested in this alleged Naxal conspiracy,
[Amit Varma]: like Ferreira and so on, had been arrested before by the Congress in 2012, 2011, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Ferreira wrote a book about his years in jail. And I think that those are the two
[Amit Varma]: deeper problems. Now, I don't want it to seem that I'm minimizing this particular group
[Amit Varma]: of people who are there. But what I am saying, and the one point where I'll differ with you
[Amit Varma]: is that you say that when we are done with these people, we'll have a new agreement with
[Amit Varma]: society, your words. I think no, I think that even that new agreement in society is meaningless
[Amit Varma]: because people respond to the structures around them, to the incentives that they face. And
[Amit Varma]: this all powerful oppressive state in combination with the way that our society is, and you
[Amit Varma]: know, it hasn't changed for decades for the better. So why should it now? And I'm not
[Amit Varma]: saying there'll never be change. I just think that it's a really long haul. And if it changes
[Amit Varma]: for the better, none of us may live to see it. But it's a really long haul. It's not
[Amit Varma]: a six or eight year process. And these deeper problems bother me far more. Because I'm actually
[Amit Varma]: lucky to be living in Maharashtra, which is a state where the BJP is not in power. These
[Amit Varma]: deeper problems are around us. I meet bigots every day. I, you know, I feel the hand of
[Amit Varma]: the state. So, you know, what, how would you respond?
[Guest]: I would actually agree with you. I don't think that anything you've said is either out of
[Guest]: whack with what I think or what I've written. I think you've just organized it better. Is
[Guest]: one of the problems the state? I would say yes, that the way in which the laws have been
[Guest]: written, and the laws have been interpreted, the rights of the state override the rights
[Guest]: of the individual almost every time that you have to go to a constitutional court to determine
[Guest]: whether or not Article 25 is true and valid for the Muslim woman. And we are going through
[Guest]: a period where a high court is listening to such a thing. Does the state have the right
[Guest]: to deny somebody the right to wear a garment over their head? The state believes it does
[Guest]: have that right. And the state wants to enforce that right. This is the important thing. The
[Guest]: state is empowered in ways that it ought not to be. And the state chooses to engage with
[Guest]: that power and chooses to wield it constantly. So, we may have spoken about this in the last
[Guest]: podcast, but the reality of that table of rights, you mentioned Singh, he's also written
[Guest]: a book on Article 19. Do we have the right to peaceful assembly? We don't. You have to
[Guest]: fill out a form and send it to the police station. The police has the right to tell
[Guest]: you whether or not they will let you peacefully assemble. Do you have the right to freedom
[Guest]: of expression? No, you don't. You've got criminal defamation, criminal contempt, sedition, you've
[Guest]: got mob violence, you've got 153A. So, you don't really have the freedom to say things
[Guest]: that people might be uncomfortable listening to. Do you have the right to occupation? The
[Guest]: Supreme Court said no, that the right of the Bihari butcher to the fundamental right of
[Guest]: the Bihari butcher to slaughter the animal that he had was overwritten by the rights
[Guest]: of the majority not to have their sentiments offended. This is the Chief Justice of the
[Guest]: Supreme Court. So, there is a structural problem there with the state that you've given it
[Guest]: too much power and it is enthusiastic and willing about using that power. Is there a
[Guest]: mechanism that you can employ to change that? And I would say the answer to that is yes.
[Guest]: And does history tell us that in the long view, states that have a fundamentally sound
[Guest]: structure are able to reform themselves very quickly if need be? I would say yes, that
[Guest]: if you have a fundamentally sound structure, which I think we do, which is the Constitution,
[Guest]: the little stuff can be sorted out. Will the state be malign even if it doesn't legally
[Guest]: have that power? I think it will to some extent because it is coded into the state to round
[Guest]: up the house servants and beat them up first before they start any kind of, you know, sort
[Guest]: of probe into theft. That's what they do. They beat people up. That's what the state
[Guest]: is in India. The most efficient part of the state in India is the police. It's law and
[Guest]: order. So, some of that will remain, it will be residual, but it will be drained out in
[Guest]: time. There is no question that that is the trajectory of modern states.
[Guest]: To the second point on society, slightly more difficult. I think because it's easy for us
[Guest]: to engage with individuals and look at their traits, and it's much more difficult for us
[Guest]: to portray that on a large number of people, that this is how they will continue to behave.
[Guest]: Dindayal Upadhyay, in his lectures, which have been compiled, the four lectures which
[Guest]: are called Integral Humanism, said that the nation was the same thing as a mob. And the
[Guest]: mob he defined, these are not his words, I'm trying to explain what it is that he said.
[Guest]: He said that it is possessed by a frenzy, which is not different one individual from
[Guest]: the other within the mob. And at a larger level, this was what the nation was, that
[Guest]: people felt something so similar that they could be compared to a mob and what the mob
[Guest]: wanted. I found that sort of, you know, interesting. I don't think he's right. I think he's very
[Guest]: wrong. The human being has not evolved differently one nation from another. Cultures, faiths
[Guest]: haven't evolved differently one nation from another. The effects on fertility rates of
[Guest]: education, modernity, poverty, illiteracy, or wealth are exactly the same everywhere
[Guest]: in the world. Now, if something so fundamental as sex and progeny is the same, is the rest
[Guest]: of it, can it be very different? I would say no. Is this purely once again, the question
[Guest]: we were talking about a while back, whereas if you look at, let's say the sensex from
[Guest]: where you're sitting, from 1980, it looks like this. But from where I'm sitting, and
[Guest]: I've got a narrow view, it looks like that. And maybe are we looking at one of the troughs
[Guest]: of a few years? I would say yes. So while I completely agree with you that the party,
[Guest]: the first part of what you said was the issue, and you and I agree that it is a serious problem.
[Guest]: The other two have to be, you know, addressed. Will the second part be addressed through
[Guest]: a conversation we have with the ballot box? I think so. Will the third part automatically
[Guest]: then fall into place? Because it follows the rules of the second that the population believes
[Guest]: that we need to do things differently, because our priorities must lie elsewhere in these
[Guest]: things. Does that change? I would say yes, it follows from there.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just think aloud. And of course, I agree with you entirely. And Mr. Upadhyaya
[Amit Varma]: is comparing a mob with the nation is rather strange. But there's one aspect in which he
[Amit Varma]: might have something there, though I don't think he meant it this way. There's this wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book by Gustave Le Bon written in the early 20th century, I think it's called The Madness
[Amit Varma]: of Crowds or something. I don't remember. I'll look it up and link it from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes. But there's an interesting insight he shares on mob psychology, which is where
[Amit Varma]: he has this concept of a threshold at which people sort of act. And you know, one of my
[Amit Varma]: friends and you might know him as well, the journalist Rishi Majumdar, he was once lynched
[Amit Varma]: somewhere in a small town, lynched in the sense lynched just means beaten up by a crowd,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, doesn't mean killed. So he was beaten up by a large mob. And he described
[Amit Varma]: it to me the way he described it was that he was just arguing with a couple of people
[Amit Varma]: and they were shouting at him and there were five, six people around him and they were
[Amit Varma]: haranguing him. And then one guy who wasn't even part of that original bunch of people,
[Amit Varma]: he just came from the fringes and he whacked him, right? Because whatever, I'm so macho,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to whack this guy. And then another guy whacked him and then people, then they
[Amit Varma]: all joined in and everybody whacked him. Now what Gustave Le Bon, and I think this is Le
[Amit Varma]: Bon's insight, I might get confused because I read a whole bunch of books on this at that
[Amit Varma]: time. No, I think this is a crowds in power. Perhaps. Yeah. And the insight here is that
[Amit Varma]: everybody has a threshold that, you know, you might be a person who if you feel like
[Amit Varma]: hitting someone, you'll hit him. But then there might be someone else who will not hit
[Amit Varma]: who be the first to hit. But if five other people hit, he'll join in and his threshold
[Amit Varma]: is five. And there might be somebody else whose threshold is 20. And then eventually
[Amit Varma]: everybody has a threshold and they all join in and they beat up whatever, right? And I
[Amit Varma]: wonder if, you know, in the kind of actions we see around us, whether there are thresholds
[Amit Varma]: in play as well. Anyway, that's a, I agree with you on the broad point that nations are
[Amit Varma]: not mobs. Now I'm going to sort of try to ask another broad question. And I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to go back to what we discussed earlier of, you know, when we think of history, if we
[Amit Varma]: think of 150 years, 200 years, it's a small sample size in the larger scheme of things.
[Amit Varma]: And another way of thinking of it like that is that we think of nation states as having
[Amit Varma]: some kind of permanence, right? That nation states have really been around for a few hundred
[Amit Varma]: years, not, not really more than that in the modern form in which we know them. This particular
[Amit Varma]: nation state of India has been around for less than 80 years now. In our minds, it is
[Amit Varma]: a permanent thing. These are lines on a map. This is kind of what it is in the lived reality
[Amit Varma]: of people. Once you forget about the oppressions of the state and the limitations that imposes,
[Amit Varma]: this is not such a factor. Like I did an episode with Nirupama Rao a couple of days back, I
[Amit Varma]: recorded it a couple of days back, it might even release after this, where she spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how the people of Tibet, when they would draw maps back in the day, there would be no borders
[Amit Varma]: on it. You know, if there's a mountain, they don't want to divide it with a border. If
[Amit Varma]: there's a river, they don't want to divide it with this thing that the cultural similarities
[Amit Varma]: that we have and what brings people together and you've been to Pakistan, I've been to
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan, we know this, we are the same people, right? You know, Lahore and Delhi have way
[Amit Varma]: more in common with each other than Delhi and Chennai. And I sometimes wonder if, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sitting from where we are, we make a mistake in assuming that this is the nation state
[Amit Varma]: of India, it will always look like this borders will always be like this. And maybe that's
[Amit Varma]: not the case. Maybe if you just step back, and you'll see that these things have been
[Amit Varma]: in flux throughout, for example, you know, you do see a north south gap coming up, this
[Amit Varma]: could explode when the delimitation issue kind of comes up. And we have the solidified
[Amit Varma]: notion. And I would say that honestly, the India that you and I love, it's sort of an
[Amit Varma]: abstract thing, which includes elements of culture and food and language and people and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. It is not lines on a map. Right? So what are kind of your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that some of the ways in which we think about the world could be constrained
[Amit Varma]: by our thinking in terms of these lines on a map?
[Guest]: Absolutely. I think that unless we acknowledge and come to terms with what we are doing in
[Guest]: Kashmir, or what we have been doing for 65 years in the Northeast, this will not end
[Guest]: well for those who think of nations as lines. Because it's unsustainable. We don't have
[Guest]: enough sovereignty, because we live in a fairly engaged world, which we want to engage with,
[Guest]: we are not telling the world go get lost, we are saying to the world, we want more responsibility
[Guest]: in this world, give us a permanent seat on the Security Council. So we are as a polity
[Guest]: as a state, we are moving in a direction where we are willing to engage with the world more
[Guest]: willing to engage with the world more necessarily means that you're giving up sovereignty on
[Guest]: many things that you will listen to the world. That's the first aspect of losing sovereignty.
[Guest]: That you have to stop speaking, let the other person speak and then respond to them, you
[Guest]: might choose not to say anything back or you might say, as this government does, this is
[Guest]: our internal matter get lost. But the reason why you're forced to say even that is that
[Guest]: it is the first element of a loss of sovereignty, which all states have no matter how powerful.
[Guest]: In such a world as we are seeing develop, can you continue to have actions from the
[Guest]: government as we have today in the Northeast and in Kashmir, I would say no, and I would
[Guest]: say not for very long. And if you don't, the external world will force changes on you.
[Guest]: And then you will not be able to see the same lines that you saw, or the lines that you
[Guest]: even the lines on the ground today are not the ones that are there in my mind. Most Indians
[Guest]: would be very disturbed if they saw the actual map, and we're actually the line of control
[Guest]: in Kashmir, for example, I was I think, 16 or 17 when I first saw it, and I was traumatized.
[Guest]: Because the idea we have so anthropomorphize the map, and it looks so much like a like
[Guest]: a person that any part of it, particularly the head, you know, being shown as being in
[Guest]: a possession of somebody else seems very, very wrong and very off. And that's the way
[Guest]: I felt then. External change will come. And I'm not just talking about the fact that we
[Guest]: engage with the world and most nations want to be part of a rules based system where human
[Guest]: rights is one of the rules, then it's not just that. I think the broadest parts of change
[Guest]: come because of of technological shifts, and the rate at which it's happening today is
[Guest]: much faster than it was in the past. Accelerating, in fact, one of the most obvious things that
[Guest]: that occurs to somebody who looks on this and says, Okay, what does that have to do
[Guest]: with the state? So when Jammu and Kashmir acceded to the Union, one of the conditions
[Guest]: one of the handful of conditions they had was that communications would be controlled
[Guest]: by the Union government. Communications can't be controlled by anybody today. You know,
[Guest]: because communications that word meant the telegraph and the telephone, in a time of
[Guest]: the world and maybe highways, if you were to sort of extend it. Today, none of that
[Guest]: is actually relevant in a world where you can communicate without the without the state
[Guest]: being an either a provider or an intermediary or an agent of any sort. A state can deny
[Guest]: that to you for how long I don't know. But it cannot, it doesn't control communications
[Guest]: anymore. That whole part is gone. One of only three or four things that the Union of India
[Guest]: had wanted from Kashmir. So that that's, that's the nature of the world we live in. How much
[Guest]: power will the state have over the individual and the way they lead their lives? 20 years
[Guest]: from now, it's hard to imagine a world where what happens in Kashmir today, which is that
[Guest]: there is no freedom of either assembly, where there's denial of community. Kashmiris are
[Guest]: the only part of the world not to have had any education through the pandemic period,
[Guest]: because for 17 months, they didn't have any net. It's hard to imagine a state doing that
[Guest]: being able to get away with doing that 20 years from now, I don't think it'll happen.
[Guest]: So what are the options? Either you fix it, or it'll fix itself. I think those of us who
[Guest]: are line nationalists, as I have been for most of my life, will will have will be forced
[Guest]: to fix it. These are problems that you cannot let fester for too long. If you want these
[Guest]: lines to remain, it will be one or the other. And I think that the what you and I saw on
[Guest]: old maps, you know, where when you said it about the Tibetans, it sort of occurred to
[Guest]: me that all really old maps don't have like they just say, Tibet, China, India here, you
[Guest]: know, this is very big, there's no sort of nation state pipelines, it will probably become
[Guest]: that. I'm saying that right now, again, looking at the kind of long view of history and the
[Guest]: short view of history, global trade was low from 2014 onwards was very high before that.
[Guest]: Last year was the biggest, there was a 23% boom in sort of global trade. Will that continue?
[Guest]: Probably not, because there's a sort of limited space there is. But the desire is there that
[Guest]: we want to be a world where it's easy for components to shift quickly, sort of in and
[Guest]: out of countries without too much paperwork, so that efficiency is where it's at. I don't
[Guest]: foresee that being too different for people either, that you will have movement, which
[Guest]: will be fairly smooth and much simpler than it was 20 years ago, or is, you know, today,
[Guest]: this sort of system, I don't think will continue for too long. And it's for nation states that
[Guest]: are particularly nationalistic or have lots of nationalistic people within them to ask
[Guest]: themselves what because there'll be a lot of trauma. This will come with a lot of pain
[Guest]: for many people who don't think of the world as a benign place outside of the nation, they
[Guest]: see their geography in sort of Chanakyan terms, you know, where the immediate neighbor is
[Guest]: an enemy and then so on. That's not I mean, that's neither is that the reality, nor is
[Guest]: that something that they will be able to escape from in the very near future. I think in our
[Guest]: lifetimes, I don't think that you and I will die in a nation that is even remotely similar
[Guest]: to the one that we are living in. Yeah, I'm assuming we don't die too soon.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, in the long run, we're all dead, as you can see.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's very true.
[Amit Varma]: I'm struck by what you said there about the relevance of the nation state and that in
[Amit Varma]: many ways, it might gradually be becoming more and more helpless, because one of the
[Amit Varma]: themes I've been thinking about and in different contexts, and it seems to really apply uniformly
[Amit Varma]: and might apply to this also, is the dissipation of mainstreams and the decentralization of
[Amit Varma]: everything. We see this in the media, for example, where you had a consensus on the
[Amit Varma]: truth in the 90s, because you had these mainstream outlets, and they controlled everything. And
[Amit Varma]: that's completely dissipated, you know, information, knowledge, anyone can kind of go there. And
[Amit Varma]: I think net net, it's a good thing. But obviously, it has obvious negative effects, which we've
[Amit Varma]: kind of seen equally in, you know, in the world of cinema, in the world of music, you
[Amit Varma]: have these kinds of dissipation, Steve Van Zandt said in a spoken and old interview about,
[Amit Varma]: you had a mainstream in music, which was rock, only and in the Western world, only really
[Amit Varma]: between the 60s, Beatles, Dylan going electric to Nirvana. And after that is kind of dissipated
[Amit Varma]: in all kinds of little niches that often don't even talk to each other. And I wonder if that's,
[Amit Varma]: that's, you know, one of those illustrations of something that is mainstream, not recognizing
[Amit Varma]: its own irrelevance is the whole nation state kind of thing where we don't need to function
[Amit Varma]: within those frameworks as well. Individuals are empowered by technology and trade to kind
[Amit Varma]: of go beyond it. And a lot of the authoritarianism that you see is in a sense, a kind of response
[Amit Varma]: to that.
[Guest]: I think that the the nation state is constructed for a reality which is very fast eroding.
[Guest]: So let's say one aspect is the military, which is like a disproportionate sum is spent by
[Guest]: many nations, which face very little threat on things on toys that they will never use.
[Guest]: We bought 36 planes for 59,000 crore rupees, when the last war where we use fighter jets
[Guest]: in meaningfully was 50 years ago. Do we foresee of war with the state sort of anytime soon?
[Guest]: I hope not. But that is the the architecture of the state that it looks on itself, not
[Guest]: only as a provider of security and a sovereign, but also a provider of services to the community
[Guest]: that it services itself. Are we built for purpose as the corporate set would say? No.
[Guest]: Because the impulse of the state in many parts of the world, including ours, is to focus
[Guest]: disproportionately large resources on the negative side of what it does, stopping people
[Guest]: from doing something, law and order, rather than being able to make things more sort of
[Guest]: not just efficient, because that's a word that has been captured by the set that extols
[Guest]: Aadhaar, but by making things easier for the citizen and the individual to enjoy their
[Guest]: lives more. There is a disconnect between that kind of Ram Rajya type thing, which I
[Guest]: presume is what was meant when that when that phrase was constructed. I hope it wasn't the
[Guest]: fact that we should have a sort of society that is stratified by caste. But we're not
[Guest]: and this will break. Either you change yourself or you fail. And failure comes to many states.
[Guest]: It may interest your listeners to know that India has substantially moved away from the
[Guest]: Nordic states on the failed states index towards Somalia and Yemen. We are moving in that direction.
[Guest]: We're not there yet, obviously. But the direction of the movement is sort of in the wrong way.
[Guest]: And I think only one reason is that first part of the three part problem that you spoke
[Guest]: of, which is the party in power, I think, in large measure is also the third part, which
[Guest]: is that the state is not built for the purpose of modern living tends to focus on the wrong
[Guest]: things too much of the time. And we'll have to change or we'll have change forced on it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm reminded of, you know, Francis Fukuyama had sort of, I learned about a framework of
[Amit Varma]: looking at the state through him where there are you look at it alongside accesses of access
[Amit Varma]: of scope and strength. And the problem with the Indian state really is that it should
[Amit Varma]: do a few things and do them really well, like protect rights, like rule of law and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. But it does many things and does them really badly. And of course, it does a few
[Amit Varma]: things like rent seeking exceedingly well. But that aside, so you know, this is just
[Amit Varma]: sort of a fundamental problem with it. I want to sort of, you know, almost continuing along
[Amit Varma]: these same lines, but on a sideways theme, you know, one of the, for me, the most interesting
[Amit Varma]: debate in that Nehru book I mentioned was between Nehru and Mohammad Iqbal. And there
[Amit Varma]: I realized that, you know, there's almost a sense that Nehru doesn't understand what
[Amit Varma]: Iqbal is all about. And then Iqbal writes him this letter where he's very patiently
[Amit Varma]: explaining to him that it's almost like, dekho beta ye hai. And it seems to me that Nehru's
[Amit Varma]: focus is on the nation state that is to come. That is true. That is India. And he's already
[Amit Varma]: got that idea of India in his head, which he develops, solidifies all of that. And that
[Amit Varma]: is where we are. And that is where we went. Iqbal's focus is on a bunch of different things.
[Amit Varma]: And his thing is the Muslims of India and indeed elsewhere, are not just thinking of
[Amit Varma]: a nation state, you know, they are also simultaneously grappling with does their loyalty lie to Umma,
[Amit Varma]: which is a larger sort of Muslim brotherhood, a Muslim nation, as it were. And at this point,
[Amit Varma]: we are in the British Empire, there is no Indian state yet. So, you know, while Nehru
[Amit Varma]: is focused on that one thing, they are talking at cross purposes, because to Iqbal, there
[Amit Varma]: are other worries, which encompasses which go well beyond this, all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And so tell me a little bit about and perhaps you could argue that, you know, some Hindus
[Amit Varma]: may have also, you know, had a crude version of the same thing that it was not about nation
[Amit Varma]: state, it was reaching ancient Hindu glory again, and all of that. But leaving that aside,
[Amit Varma]: and it seems to me that in a sense, it's a tragedy for the Muslims of this geography,
[Amit Varma]: that they kind of first got trapped by partition, and then they got trapped into a particular
[Amit Varma]: nation state, which has now gone along this particular direction. And it almost seems
[Amit Varma]: a discontinuity with history, they will, you know, there were thoughts kind of going in
[Amit Varma]: different this thing. And I'm not obviously saying that the Umma could be something concrete,
[Amit Varma]: or it could be something but in terms of your sense of identity, then perhaps being constrained
[Amit Varma]: in one way, and perhaps being expanded in a good way, where you know, as a citizen of
[Amit Varma]: a nation state, you know, there are good aspects to that as well. So what is kind of your sense
[Amit Varma]: of the history of this, because now sitting in the current moment, everything seems solid
[Amit Varma]: to us, that nation state India line on a map, it is solid, you know, we have Muslims, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Pakistan doesn't have so many Hindus. So we are secular, but we have 15% all of
[Amit Varma]: this is happening. Everything kind of seems solid. But these are really to me, for lack
[Amit Varma]: of a better term, I'm not being very eloquent. These are kind of liquid questions. These
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, the resonances of the past continue to echo today.
[Guest]: No, the two things that I think would stand out in terms of not being as solid in the
[Guest]: period that you're speaking of, would be first that the because they were in a weaker opposition
[Guest]: in bargaining terms, the Muslim League said, they said two things. One is guarantee us
[Guest]: a certain number of seats in these areas, and in the union, separate electorates, which
[Guest]: was which the Congress said no. The second thing that they said as a compromise, if not
[Guest]: this, then this. Not a strong union government, a federal government, a federation of states
[Guest]: that become a unified India. Congress said no to that. Nehru wanted, Nehru is closer
[Guest]: to the BJP in many ways, he sees India as this kind of, you know, civilizational state
[Guest]: Bharat Mata, as you said, forward looking into what it could become rather than what
[Guest]: it what it was. And also exactly like the BJP, the BJP, this is the same set of speeches
[Guest]: again, did not want the states. He said that we cannot have Tamil Mata, Banga Mata, Bihar
[Guest]: Mata, we only have Bharat Mata. So, there will only be one legislative body in the center,
[Guest]: and you will have the village. And the dislike of federation continues. I think that GST,
[Guest]: with GST, we've seen the states give up a lot of the power that they had, which they
[Guest]: shouldn't have, I think. And you're seeing that people are questioning even article one
[Guest]: of the Constitution, perhaps not knowing that it's there, that we are a union of states,
[Guest]: which is what we are. So, at that point, I don't think they foresaw it becoming this.
[Guest]: And I think that they would have acted, or at least tried to, I hope, in substantial
[Guest]: measure to not reach where we have today. Iqbal, who died 10 years before partition,
[Guest]: 1938, he went to Spain. So, he's a lawyer, not a man who was part of government, also
[Guest]: poet, very fine one, went to Spain and went to saw the West and said, Spain is obviously
[Guest]: the sort of what many Muslims consider to be the high watermark of their civilization
[Guest]: and felt that there's something wrong that's happening here. And it's happened because
[Guest]: of faith, that there's some linkage to faith, that if we are able to fix that, we can go
[Guest]: back to be as good as we were then. And then we can compete with the West on good terms.
[Guest]: I don't think that the idea was conquest. The idea was, okay, what's wrong with us?
[Guest]: No, that what can we fix? And to his mind, the biggest influencer was faith, that if
[Guest]: you fixed faith, then you would be able to fix yourself. So, he is a supporter of the
[Guest]: idea that you Islamize government, that you bring in faith into the state. And then by
[Guest]: that thing, two things change. One is the faith itself becomes more modern. And then
[Guest]: the state itself becomes more sort of Islamic. When Liaqat Ali Khan speaks to the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly, the minorities are very vocal, they say that this is a problem, you're going to
[Guest]: introduce religion into the law, we'll be discriminated against. His speech, he says,
[Guest]: no, we'll make sure that that's not the case. But most of his speeches on the fact that
[Guest]: he's saying that this is not aimed at you, it's aimed at Muslims, that the modernity
[Guest]: had run far ahead, he's speaking in 1950. So, this is just a few years after the atom
[Guest]: bomb is thrown on Japan. He's saying that it's reached far beyond the spiritual side
[Guest]: of man, and we need to integrate the two. And so, he comes to the same conclusion as
[Guest]: you know, Iqbal does that if we were to integrate faith into the state, we could reform both
[Guest]: and make them sort of better, which didn't happen, obviously. The interesting thing to
[Guest]: me is that while India in the last few years, legally speaking, has become communal, it
[Guest]: has become has introduced religion into the idea of citizenship, the right to propagation
[Guest]: was taken away from the Christians very early on, which is both a criminal offence and a
[Guest]: fundamental right in this strange nation. And the sort of introduction of the criminalization
[Guest]: of the possession of beef, what we are seeing with the hijab and the law, Pakistan's moving
[Guest]: in the opposite direction, it's secularizing itself. So, Pakistan, Bangladesh and India
[Guest]: have the same 150 year old penal code, which was given to us by a Macaulay. The only way
[Guest]: that Pakistan felt it could do something different from us was to change that penal code. So,
[Guest]: they introduced in the 80s, lashing for drinking, which they haven't carried out in decades.
[Guest]: In fact, the Supreme Court has read down the offence of a drinking saying that it's not
[Guest]: a sin. They introduced the hudhud punishments where you would cut somebody's hand off at
[Guest]: the wrist for theft and then the leg the next time and so on. And they trained a set of
[Guest]: surgeons to carry out these amputations and never even carried out one. Doctors were terrified
[Guest]: when they were being trained, the judges were all trained in common law. So, Pakistan has
[Guest]: tried to become sort of Islamic and very different from India and from Bangladesh but has failed.
[Guest]: Laws that were introduced also in the 80s on say rape, where rape was taken out of the
[Guest]: penal code and sent into Sharia, where if the woman who was raped couldn't prove by
[Guest]: bringing four male witnesses to the act of rape, which was an impossibility, then she
[Guest]: will be charged with a fornication. So, under Musharraf, that law was brought back into
[Guest]: the penal code from Sharia. So, it's very difficult to tell the difference between the
[Guest]: Islamic state of Pakistan and the secular republic of sort of India in terms of law
[Guest]: because they pretty much show the same thing. Even in terms of policy, they show the same
[Guest]: thing. Pakistan, by law, no non-Muslim can become the prime minister there. There is
[Guest]: no chance of a Muslim becoming a prime minister here. So, whether it's through your actions
[Guest]: or through your statement of intent on what you want to be, there is not that much difference.
[Guest]: And I think that both sets of people, Nehru on this side because he was the most obstinate
[Guest]: and I think Liaquat and Jinnah himself and the rest of them, Iqbal certainly, had looked
[Guest]: on the subcontinent of 2022, would have had to recalibrate the way that they imagined
[Guest]: both the nation state and the role of faith.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I mean, if Pakistan is moving in the right direction, then that's that's
[Amit Varma]: one thing that supports your argument of the arc of history going towards a good place
[Amit Varma]: as well. And one thing the arc of history certainly does is go towards a commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. So, we'll take a quick break and then we'll come back and continue this discussion.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me and I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at IndiaUncut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to IndiaUncut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at IndiaUncut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Aakar Patel.
[Guest]: Hello.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the really interesting bits about your Price of the Modi years book, and it's
[Amit Varma]: a great book, a lot of it is interesting, but I love the introduction where you speak
[Amit Varma]: about Modi and at one point you have this passage in the book where you write, Modi's
[Amit Varma]: contribution has been to align the party to its original RSS roots while retaining and
[Amit Varma]: increasing mass support and bringing crores more to the ideology of Hindutva. He has legitimized
[Amit Varma]: and normalized the RSS and made its values promoting an exclusionary nationalism acceptable
[Amit Varma]: to Indians. What was once communal is now legitimate and what was secular has been made
[Amit Varma]: inauthentic. It is a remarkable achievement and must be acknowledged. Stop quote. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, I want to ask you at this point about, you know, Carlisle's great man theory
[Amit Varma]: of history, where the great man theory of history is, of course, that there are great
[Amit Varma]: men who move history and make things happen and blah, blah, blah. Yeah. And many historians
[Amit Varma]: would argue that that's not the case. We are giving too much credit to great men and women
[Amit Varma]: and mostly men in history, unfortunately. And really currents of history move in a particular
[Amit Varma]: direction and individuals don't play such a great role in that. And the reason I read
[Amit Varma]: out the Para is I was, I was struck by this. Modi's contribution has to, is this, it is
[Amit Varma]: a remarkable achievement. Now, on the one hand, it strikes me that, you know, that in
[Amit Varma]: a sense is that this was waiting to happen. Society catching up with politics was waiting
[Amit Varma]: to happen. Inevitably, at some point it happened. And, you know, you can argue about the timing
[Amit Varma]: this way or that way, but it would have happened. But the other argument is that, like you're
[Amit Varma]: saying individuals do make a difference. There's Modi who managed to build this personality
[Amit Varma]: cult. There's Amit Shah, whose skills as an election manager are indisputable in the way
[Amit Varma]: that he managed to consolidate the Hindu vote. And again, there are all the counterfactuals
[Amit Varma]: like Keshava Guha wrote an essay about, think of all the untimely deaths, which enabled
[Amit Varma]: the state of events today. Pramod Mahajan dying, for example, would Modi have come up
[Amit Varma]: in the party in the way that he did if Pramod Mahajan hadn't died? Or within the Congress,
[Amit Varma]: strong leaders like, you know, Cyndia Pilate and so on dying, you know, would, would the
[Amit Varma]: family have captured the party so completely if those guys had still been around? So what
[Amit Varma]: are your kind of views on this? Because it's very easy to make this one man, Modi, the
[Amit Varma]: locus of the whole thing and say that, okay, he's come around and he's changed all this
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. But the other side also seems plausible to me that this shit
[Amit Varma]: would have happened anyway. Maybe somebody else would have been in charge. Maybe the
[Amit Varma]: BJP would have come to power in 2019 instead of 2014. Maybe it would have been Adityanath.
[Guest]: Maybe it would have been someone else. We don't know. But I'd see it as a, as a car,
[Guest]: the car, the first gear is the most, the most powerful gear in the car. It takes you from
[Guest]: zero to somewhere. Going from 40 to 60 is not that big a deal. Modi took a party which
[Guest]: was at about 20% of the vote to about 38%. That is his contribution. He's widened the
[Guest]: base he's brought in people who are not traditionally BJP voters into the party. He has also for
[Guest]: the first part of what you read out, the context is a technical, that is the, when in 1980,
[Guest]: the BJP decided to rename itself from the Janasangh, Vajpayee said that he wanted to
[Guest]: transform what was a carder-based party by which he meant all the office bearers of the
[Guest]: beat of the Janasangh were members of the RSS. That was the qualification that they
[Guest]: needed to have. From that carder-based party, Vajpayee said, I'm going to make, let's make
[Guest]: this a mass-based party, by which he meant that you don't necessarily have to be a part
[Guest]: of the RSS to be a part of the BJP. But he was not able to succeed in large measure.
[Guest]: But the fact is that from single digit vote shares, all through the 50s, 60s and 70s,
[Guest]: the BJP only achieved double digit vote share and its first state victories after Advani
[Guest]: took over the party and decided that this was a good issue to campaign on. Vajpayee
[Guest]: didn't know what to mobilize people on. He had no idea that even Advani did not know
[Guest]: that this would be a big issue to mobilize on. He says, he writes in his book, My Country,
[Guest]: My Life, that he was surprised when he got the response that he did on his Arath Yatra,
[Guest]: which Modi was the organizer of the first leg from Somnath. Then you had a very serious
[Guest]: episode of violence and 3,000 Indians died. But the party got its first states, UP, it
[Guest]: won UP. That was, I think, the shift for the BJP from being many decades run as a hardworking
[Guest]: kind of RSS type discipline force into a mass force. That is what Advani did. Modi carried
[Guest]: it to the next step. So, I don't think it is fair to either to Advani or the rest of
[Guest]: the people within the BJP to say that this is one man's doing. It's not. It's much easier
[Guest]: to take the party from 20 to 38 than it is from 0 to 5, which is what a lot of people
[Guest]: did before him, including Dindayal Upadhyaya and Balraj Mathuk and Vajpayee, of course.
[Guest]: What he's done in a period of our history, where the idea that India is destined for
[Guest]: greatness and that greatness was not very far off, and that greatness could be achieved
[Guest]: through an individual charismatic person, came together with this man. He had one more
[Guest]: advantage, which is that he's the only leader in our history, the only chief minister in
[Guest]: our history, because law and order is a state problem, to remain in office after a major
[Guest]: pogrom. Nobody else in our, everybody else, if you look at Gujarat itself, 69, you know,
[Guest]: Mahendra Desai loses his job. Wherever we've had violence, including in Maharashtra, Nayak
[Guest]: was taken out, Pawar. When you have mass violence, we seem to think that we know that justice
[Guest]: will almost never come. But one thing that we can do to move on from this is to change
[Guest]: the face of the leadership so that society can feel that the past was wrong. And then,
[Guest]: you know, we've moved on. It didn't happen in Gujarat. Not only did it not happen, he
[Guest]: was endorsed by the Hindu voters three times after that. And so he was able to, without
[Guest]: doing anything, retain that Hindutva majoritarian charisma that was his when he oversaw the
[Guest]: events which are this week, exactly 20 years old. Vajpayee was unable to remove him. He
[Guest]: tried to wrestle him down in Goa. And Modi said that he would resign if the party wanted
[Guest]: it to. The carder barked at Vajpayee and said, you can't do this. He has to remain. And I
[Guest]: think he expresses a very confident majoritarianism, which Vajpayee did not or could not. Advani
[Guest]: tried to but also muffled his voice by saying, you know, saddest day of my life sort of nonsense.
[Guest]: There is nothing apologetic about what Modi says or does, which is what makes him attractive
[Guest]: to a large part of his constituency. In his absence, to sort of return to what you said,
[Guest]: would we still have arrived at this place? I would say no. It is highly unlikely that
[Guest]: the natural course would have brought us here. And for this reason that in taking the party
[Guest]: from 20 to 38, he brought in people who are not traditionally majoritarian voters. A large
[Guest]: part of his popularity, which is then reflected in his image in the media, is his messianic
[Guest]: quality as somebody who will bring India to what is called a developed nation, whatever
[Guest]: that means. That will sort of become the next US or the next China, which we are not clearly
[Guest]: now that the evidence is there. And that part of that vote would not have come to the BJP
[Guest]: just automatically. You needed somebody from a mercantile type background, running a state
[Guest]: for several years and able to still retain that quality of being Hindutva minded automatically
[Guest]: as he is. So, he was able to bring those things together. In his absence, I don't think they
[Guest]: would be at 38%. Would he have brought the party to 5% from zero? I would say no. He
[Guest]: doesn't have the focus or the concentration, extremely solipsistic and sort of inward looking.
[Guest]: He is the antithesis of all those people who we barely remember the faces of, who brought
[Guest]: the party to 18 and 20%. And I think because he's spent two decades in office of sitting
[Guest]: over absolute majorities for all of these 20 years, he's never learned how to compromise,
[Guest]: how to take no for an answer, how to step back. And he's been forced to externally by
[Guest]: the women of Shaheen Bagh on the issue of CA, by the farmers mostly Sikh on the issue
[Guest]: of the farm laws, as will happen also on the issue of hijab. And that is not the sign of
[Guest]: somebody who can build something. You can only construct when you have the patience
[Guest]: and the ability to work with people. If you focus on yourself all the time, which he is,
[Guest]: you're not going to be able to build too much. So, in this instance, definitely, I would
[Guest]: say that in his absence, the party would not be where it is today. But also that in his
[Guest]: presence, the party would not be aware it was in the 60s and 70s.
[Amit Varma]: Lots to think about that. But you know, my brief counterpoint to that would be that this
[Amit Varma]: widening of the base, I think it started happening before that. I mean, even if you think back
[Amit Varma]: to 2010-2011, India against corruption, the anger against the debt dispensation coming
[Amit Varma]: to the brim, people just fed up of corruption, people fed up of everything that was happening,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and had Vajpayee been 10 years younger and still been around, he would actually have
[Amit Varma]: had a record in government to point out because he did do a lot of economic reforms. And in
[Amit Varma]: that sense, he had already walked that talk to some extent. I feel like Modi was right
[Amit Varma]: time right place in the sense he came along at a time where everything was there and he
[Amit Varma]: captured it and he embodied it. And there's no question that he obviously didn't believe
[Amit Varma]: it because a lot of the rhetoric that he gave like Salman Sohs was on my show and he said
[Amit Varma]: even though I'm from the Congress, when he came to power, there's a part of me, which
[Amit Varma]: said maybe it's a good thing. Maybe he'll do all of these things, minimum government,
[Amit Varma]: maximum governance, and all of that. And of course, none of that happened. You realized
[Amit Varma]: immediately that that was just kind of BS. I'm also struck by, you know, the narrative
[Amit Varma]: of the 80s that when when Vajpayee started the BJP circa 1980, he spoke of Gandhian socialism,
[Amit Varma]: because he wanted to kind of expand that, you know, they got very few seats in that
[Amit Varma]: first 84 parliament, but Veer Sanghvi's argument in his book, and he also expanded upon it
[Amit Varma]: in his episode with me, was that that 1984 vote for Rajiv Gandhi was a Hindu vote, because
[Amit Varma]: it was an anti Sikh vote, it was a Hindu vote, he had the Hindu vote, the BJP realized that
[Amit Varma]: what the hell is happening, we are talking Gandhian socialism, while the Congress is
[Amit Varma]: getting the Hindu vote. So they pivoted, and they went hardcore and Rajiv Gandhi didn't
[Amit Varma]: realize this, and he lost that. And you know, and it worked out for the BJP right time,
[Amit Varma]: right place, everything, but it was Rajiv Gandhi who opened up, you know, the Babri
[Amit Varma]: Masjid at that time. So it's, it's like, that force in society, you know, whether you call
[Amit Varma]: it the Hindu vote, whether you judge it one way or another way, that doesn't matter that
[Amit Varma]: force was there, it was going to be expressed, it was going to grow. And it kind of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, went in that direction. Would you differ with for example, some, you know, Veer's view
[Guest]: of the 80s and so on? I haven't read his book, but I'll say this, that what do we know about
[Guest]: the manifestos of the Jana Sangh and the BJP, they don't change at all. It's exactly the
[Guest]: same issues throughout the decades. When Vajpayee cedes the presidency to Advani for two years,
[Guest]: Advani doesn't do anything, he doesn't know what to do, basically. What happens is that
[Guest]: a bunch of people within the BJP who are also connected to the VHP, including Raj Mathas
[Guest]: India and Katiyar, they begin to associate themselves with this movement, which says
[Guest]: that we need to break this mosque, and we need to build a temple. Advani at some point
[Guest]: determines that he will throw the party's weight behind it, despite the fact that as
[Guest]: you see the BJP's constitution, the first page of which says that we will, we will sort
[Guest]: of adhere to Gandhian socialism, that will be the party's guiding, that will be the party's
[Guest]: official philosophy, I think, if I'm not mistaken, and the guiding philosophy will be integral
[Guest]: humanism. They also, Vajpayee, nine years before the law was passed, puts in secular
[Guest]: into the party's constitution saying that we will sort of adhere to secularism. I think
[Guest]: the shift is the Babri Masjid, that you can you mobilize around violence against Muslims
[Guest]: and Advani figures that the answer to that is yes. Would that naturally have happened
[Guest]: in democratic politics? No, you need an agent to make it nasty. Democratic politics, like
[Guest]: the reason why it is the if you are sane in this country, you don't have a problem with
[Guest]: TMC, like don't have too much of a problem with the TMC, or the INC or the ADMK or the
[Guest]: DMK or whatever or Naveen Patnaik or PDP or you know, whoever else. But if you do have
[Guest]: that bent of mind, you there is only one party for you. It's only the BJP wherever in the
[Guest]: country you are. So, that tells you that it's not normal. Doing this requires something
[Guest]: within you that most people don't have, most parties don't want to have. The BJP has it,
[Guest]: it wants to do this. It's the best at doing it. For this reason, that it's genuine. It's
[Guest]: the real thing. It's genuinely bigoted. And it displays its bigotry. Well, Modi is the
[Guest]: best person to express it. You spoke about Vajpayee and the deautees or the late 90s
[Guest]: and walking the talk. Modi doesn't walk, he only talks. There is no the demonstration
[Guest]: is there. Eight years is sufficient evidence. There is no this is the period between the
[Guest]: capture of the chancellorship and the beginning of the Second World War. All of the work has
[Guest]: all the time is already there. The data shows that there is failure. You could argue that
[Guest]: we got one lakh crore rupees in GST last year, which is what, in his defense, he said that,
[Guest]: oh, you know, the GST, we are back to where we were in 2018. And that's a great sign.
[Guest]: I don't know what that means. But he's not able to walk. He's shown that. He walks in
[Guest]: disastrous ways like demonetization was literally stamping on the messianic figures in our part
[Guest]: of the world are dangerous, whether they are from the Congress Party, or whether they are
[Guest]: from from the BJP, because the polity will just dissolve, not only bend, it will not
[Guest]: there is no ability to say no. And there is no ability to execute with competence, which
[Guest]: is the worst kind of thing to be in and have a very strong leader, which we which is what
[Guest]: we have. And which is why we are where we are. I did an episode with Vinay Sitapati
[Amit Varma]: on his book on you know, the BJP for Modi as it were. And one of the interesting points
[Amit Varma]: he made there was that in his view, you know, Vajpayee and Advani were playing the game
[Amit Varma]: because that's where they saw the biggest benefit for their politics that this is how
[Amit Varma]: you can mobilize people and blah, blah, blah. But according to him, Modi and Shah were true
[Amit Varma]: believers, you know, which is dangerous and which ties in with what you're kind of saying.
[Amit Varma]: I want to talk a little bit about Modi now, but in a sense that there is a wider application
[Amit Varma]: to of this as well. So I had written a column a few years back called the Aankho Dekhi Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister. And that was based on an anecdote that a friend of Modi's told me. And this
[Amit Varma]: friend of his used to work with him in the aughties when he was CM of Gujarat. And she
[Amit Varma]: describes that one evening there was like a personal gathering at his residence of six
[Amit Varma]: or seven people. And he was telling them a story about how his mother was once ill. When
[Amit Varma]: he was a boy, his mother was very ill and he went to switch on the fan because she was
[Amit Varma]: feeling hot. And he realized that there is no electricity. And as he related the story,
[Amit Varma]: he started crying. And my friend's point of this was that his understanding of the world
[Amit Varma]: is purely experiential. He has experienced that electricity is a big deal. He has experienced
[Amit Varma]: that roads matter. So when he comes to power, these are the things he focuses on. But beyond
[Amit Varma]: this, he can't comprehend anything. In fact, my column was sort of in a sense an argument
[Amit Varma]: for reading more that, you know, an experiential understanding of the world only goes so far.
[Amit Varma]: There are so many things beyond this, especially when you're running a country, you'll you
[Amit Varma]: think of things like, you know, spontaneous order, the way economies organize themselves
[Amit Varma]: and how all human interactions are a positive sum game. And these are unintuitive things
[Amit Varma]: that you do not really understand all the time from personal experience. And my point
[Amit Varma]: with him was that in his case, one cannot judge him for not being a good reader, because
[Amit Varma]: that's a question of privilege. If he hasn't read, he hasn't read. But then the approach
[Amit Varma]: of a person like that is that you have the intellectual humility, you surround yourself
[Amit Varma]: with experts, and you listen to them. And you understand the limitations of your own
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and understanding. And in that area, he's completely lacking. And I want to quote
[Amit Varma]: this bit. And this is really you quoting Modi. So it's Modi himself, where in your book,
[Amit Varma]: you quote this Madhu Kishwer interview from 2014. And there and these are Modi's words
[Amit Varma]: which are quoting that as a YouTube link, I'll put in the show notes. And he told Ms.
[Amit Varma]: Kishwer, quote, three or four days after I had taken office as chief minister, the chief
[Amit Varma]: secretary came to me, he brought a heap of files this tall, and he made a gesture about
[Amit Varma]: three feet high, they must have weighed 15 or 20 kilos, the PN left them on my table,
[Amit Varma]: the chief secretary sat and said to me, this is a file for Narmada. I can remember Narmada,
[Amit Varma]: but there were three other files also. The CES said, these are on Gujarat's vital and
[Amit Varma]: sensitive issues, take the time out to read them, you may need to speak on or take a position
[Amit Varma]: on at any time and address all these issues. I kept looking up and down the height of the
[Amit Varma]: stack three or four times I said to him, you leave here and we shall meet in a few days.
[Amit Varma]: I did not even open those files, they stayed where they were, stop quote, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. And basically, the thrust of it is that he'll tell any of the bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: with him that you summarize it in a couple of words, and in a couple of lines, or, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you know, give me a couple of slides and basically, just sort of sum it up. So
[Amit Varma]: obviously no appetite for complexity. And this also reminds me of something that Harry
[Amit Varma]: Truman said when he was president, where he said, give me a one handed economist, because
[Amit Varma]: all his economists kept saying on one hand this on the other hand that so he was like,
[Amit Varma]: no, you want certainty, you want to be able to take decisions. And I and the reason I,
[Amit Varma]: you know, love this part where you talk about Modi is that you talk about two qualities
[Amit Varma]: that are ascribed to him, decisiveness and charismatic, and you break it down. And you
[Amit Varma]: talk about why they are really bad qualities. And it seemed to me that this simplistic appetite
[Amit Varma]: for knowledge that you know, make it simple and give it to me. And you know, the certainties
[Amit Varma]: that come from this, it seems to me that they tie in directly to these two words decisive
[Amit Varma]: and charismatic. So break those down a little bit for me, because I love the way you did
[Guest]: that in the book. Yeah, the guy who was the chief secretary then 21 years ago is still
[Guest]: in Modi's office guy called PK Mishra. Wow. So these are the same people he's worked with
[Guest]: and is you know, a comfortable working with who are willing to do what it is that he requires
[Guest]: them to do. And it appears based on his words that he does not like as you said, a complexity
[Guest]: that the simplification of an issue down to its essential elements is sufficient for him
[Guest]: to understand it at at like, whatever depth he feels is necessary. But to add to that
[Guest]: he has the quality of based on that material deciding what it is that should be done next.
[Guest]: And I think that a lot of the things that you might look at as unique things that he
[Guest]: has brought into the system, on the side of the economy, on the side of foreign policy,
[Guest]: on the side of national security can be seen as emanating from these two characteristics
[Guest]: where the problem is simplified, and then that simplified problem is given a solution,
[Guest]: which doesn't really work. It doesn't even work at the level of a household forget at
[Guest]: the level of a nation, where things unfortunately, are so complex, that they can never be simplified.
[Guest]: It's not possible that the what ifs are so many, that to calculate each of them would
[Guest]: be to count the atoms of the universe that it but that is what certitude is, it says
[Guest]: that there is a certain way of doing things, which will either break from the past or be
[Guest]: done right by this person who means well, I think that's the one thing I think he's
[Guest]: able to absorb his mistakes. Because I think he genuinely believes and maybe it is the
[Guest]: case that he means well. So once once that is internalized, then it doesn't matter then
[Guest]: then, then failure or what somebody else sees as failure is just fate. It's not for lack
[Guest]: of the person's intent and lack of the person's honesty, you know, somebody who breaks down
[Guest]: crying while speaking about himself will have such characteristics. And I think that it
[Guest]: will be interesting if somebody once again looks at him. I'm not talking of a psychological
[Guest]: profile, but I'm saying that somebody who with who understands human beings at large
[Guest]: and how they behave, just like Ashish Nandy looked at him and said that these this is
[Guest]: much before he became the chief minister, and was able to identify traits in him that
[Guest]: have all come to be shown by a Modi and so are true. He shows them quite openly I think
[Guest]: if if your listeners were to go back to that video, he's quite proud of the fact that he
[Guest]: does he can't get the I can't do this through academics study that is what those are the
[Guest]: words that he that he uses. And then he repeats himself I can't do that. He sort of emphasizes
[Guest]: that that is not my way. My way is to like, like, you know, get get the gist of something
[Guest]: and then throw the silver bullet at it. And one of the problems is that very complex problems
[Guest]: require very big minds to be thrown at them. And when you have a very complex problem with
[Guest]: somebody who refuses to approach it intellectually and has a cabal around him, which is willing
[Guest]: to go the same person that spoken of in that interview sits in the PMO today, P.K. Mishra
[Guest]: is bizarre, that nothing has been learned not only by Modi, but by those who feed him
[Guest]: the stuff. There are technical problems with this, which I have also discussed, I think
[Guest]: in this book, which is that you can only know what is fed to you. If you tell somebody summarize
[Guest]: that book for me, I will only receive what that person chooses to summarize. Thirdly,
[Guest]: because I'm very charismatic and very powerful, that person might not wish to displease me
[Guest]: by saying something that might, you know, offend or sort of upset me, particularly if
[Guest]: I have a gigantic ego. And so now you're looking at a now it's several problems that structurally
[Guest]: Rathan Roy, who was on the Prime Minister's Economic Advisory Council, a group of only
[Guest]: five people, says that people were angry with him for things that he said on television
[Guest]: that had been sent to them in writing much before because they hadn't read it. Nobody
[Guest]: read anything. But when you came on TV to say the same thing, they got upset because
[Guest]: they felt, you know, this is not the way things are. So it's quite strange. I think we will
[Guest]: never have it. But an insiders look into the PMO after 2014 would be both a fabulous book
[Guest]: to write and a terrifying one to read. I think this the way that this places are in Gujarat,
[Guest]: because we have a very strong union government, the damage that could be locally inflicted
[Guest]: was minimal. And almost none of it through law, you can't do it, you can't make up laws
[Guest]: like demonetization, or like GST, when you're sitting in Gandhi Nagar. So this part was
[Guest]: hidden, actually, because he didn't have enough authority to be able to display his full prowess.
[Guest]: But now, now that he's been given it not only in terms of the nature of the office, but
[Guest]: also the number of seats that he's got, and the continual ability of this man to keep
[Guest]: things focused on him means that this will not change.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I want to quote a couple of the lines of Ashish Nandy where he spoke about this
[Amit Varma]: meeting and I for some reason the year 1988 keeps coming to my head. So I don't know if
[Amit Varma]: I'm confusing it with something else or Nandy's interview was in 1988. But it was a long long
[Amit Varma]: time before Modi rose to positions of power. And he wrote of Modi quote, he had the same
[Amit Varma]: mix of puritanical rigidity, narrowing of emotional life, massive use of the ego defense
[Amit Varma]: of projection, denial and fear of his own passions, combined with fantasies of violence,
[Amit Varma]: all set within the matrix of clear paranoid and obsessive personality traits. I still
[Amit Varma]: remember the cool measured tone in which he elaborated a theory of cosmic conspiracy against
[Amit Varma]: India that painted every Muslim as a suspected traitor and a potential terrorist. I came
[Amit Varma]: out of the interview shaken and told Yagnik, the person who went with him, that for the
[Amit Varma]: first time, I had met a textbook case of a fascist, stop quote, and if it is 1988, it's
[Guest]: like, quite, because this just sounds so familiar. I think it's just after the yatra was was
[Guest]: organized. I could be wrong. But I think it's Yeah, I mean, I have that. He wrote about
[Guest]: this in seminar in 2002. Just after the Yeah, he wrote. Yeah. You know, and it's interesting,
[Amit Varma]: because what to us is a bug that here is a guy who doesn't read who's full of certainties
[Amit Varma]: who doesn't have humility, then becomes a feature for the electorate. Because this is
[Amit Varma]: the, for example, this is a result of his decisiveness, you know, that he has no self
[Amit Varma]: doubt at all, he doesn't know enough to have self doubt and people want decisiveness. This
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, his charisma comes from here. Because otherwise, you would expect people
[Amit Varma]: to have humility, modesty to realize that they may be wrong, but he's like super league
[Amit Varma]: confident and that kind of makes him charismatic. It's like, you know, he'd said the best lack
[Amit Varma]: all conviction while the worst are full of passionate intensity. Think about it the you've
[Guest]: got a bunch of very smart officers in the PMO, including the guy who's now the finance
[Guest]: secretary, TV Somanathan, who are told by Modi one day that we are going to get rid
[Guest]: of the currency and they are not only are they saying no to him, they are executing
[Guest]: it with with whatever level of competence that they had. It's fascinating that you have
[Guest]: such a person in office and he's popular for what he's done. It's also fascinating that
[Guest]: really smart individuals responsible mature individuals who wouldn't do the sort of things
[Guest]: that they do at home are willing to do them in office. And I don't know how many people
[Guest]: know this, but this the man who came up with the demonetization scheme is this guy who's
[Guest]: a diploma of engineer from Pune, who says that he went to Modi for 10 minutes, this
[Guest]: is just before the 2014 polls. And then he's he spends more than an hour with him. And
[Guest]: he said Modi was riveted by by what he said. And you've got these people with PhDs, you
[Guest]: know, gone to Harvard and so on, who are standing around Modi, I doubt that they sit in his
[Guest]: presence for carrying this out. It says something about us as a society that we don't have the
[Guest]: ability, whether it's the Supreme Court, whether it's the High Court here, or whether it's
[Guest]: the IAS, to be able to say no to this man, just we just go with what it is that he wants.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and actually demonetization is a classic example of the kind of folksy thinking that
[Amit Varma]: he does, that, you know, the logic for him must have been that, hey, black money is kept
[Guest]: in these big notes. So let's make sure he makes it very clear why it is that he's doing
[Guest]: this, that it's going to get rid of corruption, it's going to get rid of black money is going
[Amit Varma]: to get rid of terrorism. Yeah. And it also shows his disconnect with the real world.
[Amit Varma]: Because had he actually, you know, he wouldn't have visited a panwala in 20 years. So he
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't have known that these are really not high value notes, a medium of exchange,
[Guest]: not storage. But then that goes back to your friend and what she or he said about the experiential
[Amit Varma]: mind, right? Yeah. No, and just thinking back to a very interesting point that you made,
[Amit Varma]: that you have all these intelligent people who are IAS officers and economists and they've
[Amit Varma]: been to Harvard, Stanford, why are they not saying anything? And I think that this would
[Amit Varma]: create a kind of negative feedback loop, which would make Modi even stupider than he is.
[Guest]: Vivek Debroy said on television to Karan Thapar that demonetization would have no effect on
[Amit Varma]: GDP growth. Which he must have absolutely 100% known is a blatant lie. It's like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, no, I wrote a piece at that time talking about, you know, the useful idiots, a phrase
[Amit Varma]: used by Lenin, you know, so the useful idiots, not in a literal way, but Lenin used it for
[Amit Varma]: the so called intellectuals, who will then align with an authoritarian and they're useful
[Amit Varma]: idiots, right? Therefore, and what I had written then was that any economist who supports demonetization
[Guest]: is either a bad economist or a bad human being. You know, I think you have it there. It's
[Guest]: the bad human beingness. Panagaria will one day say that the government's doing absolutely
[Guest]: the wrong things. And the next day praise Modi for doing what he has on the economy.
[Guest]: And I think that the consistent part of those two days, is the fact that what Modi does
[Guest]: outside of the economy, Panagaria absolutely agrees with. So his love for the man doesn't
[Guest]: come out of the mischief that is being played on.
[Amit Varma]: He may not even agree with anything. He wants to be close to power.
[Guest]: He left power. He left eventually. If you're a classical economist, and you've got where
[Guest]: the sort of Holy Grail is the free trade, and you and you're running away, if not only
[Guest]: are you running away from it, you're raising tariffs and so on, you're doing exactly the
[Guest]: opposite of it. At some point, maybe his economist self said that, that that wants to wave you
[Guest]: know, goodbye to the sort of more primitive, bigoted self that that adores what what else
[Amit Varma]: was going on.
[Amit Varma]: There's something larger here that bothers me a lot. And this is something I've seen
[Amit Varma]: in recent years with even a small set of people who supported Modi, and a large set of people
[Amit Varma]: who supported Trump, for example, Trump went against every value of the Republican Party,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of being anti trade and all of that, just a whole bunch of whatever. And it leads
[Amit Varma]: me to think about how many of us who claim to be principled, who posture of ourselves
[Amit Varma]: as principled people, actually, it's a posturing, it's a tribe we are part of, and those principles
[Amit Varma]: are part of the uniform we wear. But when push comes to shove, we don't really give
[Amit Varma]: a shit about the principles.
[Guest]: Does that also hold for me in my area of expertise, my domain knowledge, I've spent 60 years studying
[Guest]: this stuff. And I think I know a set of is is this, can I be motivated sufficiently to
[Guest]: violate every single principle that I believe to be true and good in that one part of the
[Guest]: world that I know really well? And the answer seems to be yes, that I'm willing to go along
[Guest]: with whatever, so long as
[Amit Varma]: some people are some people aren't like speaking of you, I'm sure you never would, right. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I've criticized every government has been there. And it's on the basis of principle.
[Amit Varma]: So but you know, there's like Panagari has blocked me on Twitter, actually, because I
[Amit Varma]: just kept ranting about him. And just this morning, somebody asked me, would I ever have
[Guest]: Vivek Debra on my show? And, and I just feel so strongly about demonetization.
[Guest]: On the media, he doesn't he doesn't appear anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, he should be a little embarrassed of the last few years, I guess.
[Guest]: I don't think he is, because he is sort of accessible on Twitter. So you can go and say,
[Guest]: you know, whatever it is that you want to him, and he's fine with that.
[Guest]: I have no desire to do that. But yeah,
[Guest]: not just you, I'm saying that he's he's opening himself up to abuse, what he doesn't want
[Guest]: is to be questioned on what the government has done. And he's free not to not to reply
[Guest]: on Twitter. So he's got both things.
[Amit Varma]: No, and he's written lovely books, you know, and Panagari, if you look at his economics
[Amit Varma]: work before all of this, there's some fine work in there. So at some level, it's a human
[Amit Varma]: tragedy for me, to kind of see people debase and degrade themselves in the manner that
[Amit Varma]: these people have perhaps Vivek more than Mr. Panagari.
[Guest]: Yeah. And also the the idea that there was a set of people who believe in conservatism,
[Guest]: I don't know what is what the right means when it calls itself the right if it calls
[Guest]: itself the right. But there is no conservatism. This man is a radical, he's trying to undo
[Guest]: the system violently, through strokes on the economy on foreign policy on national security.
[Guest]: This is exactly the opposite of what conservative right wing people do. And I think the parallel
[Guest]: with Trump is absolutely right that they discarded the principles at the door, the moment he
[Guest]: went into the White House. Everybody who worked with him, I don't think there was any kind
[Guest]: of republican sense of like focus on the things that the party had focused on and what had
[Guest]: made the party.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's sad. And I got to thinking about this, where you mentioned that how no one
[Amit Varma]: kind of questions and I think there might be a negative feedback loop in loop in play
[Amit Varma]: there. That once people realize that he wants yes men, or who will give him simplistic narratives
[Amit Varma]: that he agrees with, they only keep doing that. Absolutely. Only people like that survive
[Amit Varma]: with him.
[Amit Varma]: You've probably nailed it.
[Amit Varma]: And because that is the only feedback that he's getting, it diminishes even him. Because
[Amit Varma]: that's the only thing he's hearing.
[Guest]: The difference between Amitabh Kant and Vivek Debroy and of course, P.K. Mishra and Apana
[Guest]: Garia who at some point would have drawn the line and said, you know, no to this and, and
[Amit Varma]: moved on.
[Amit Varma]: The next point I want to make up is, is that you spoke about how he may have the best intentions
[Amit Varma]: and it's quite possible he may and even he himself, I think after Demon at some point
[Amit Varma]: he says meri niyat to achi thi. You know, and, and I think of this and it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that actually, this doesn't matter at all. I think what we need, what we need is a system
[Amit Varma]: within which even if the worst human being on the planet became Prime Minister, the worst
[Amit Varma]: most sociopathic evil person you can think of, they, all their incentives would push
[Amit Varma]: them towards doing the right things and they wouldn't be able to do much damage.
[Amit Varma]: And today we have a system which is exactly the opposite, that you know, which is so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: oppressive that it attracts that kind of person and you're inevitably going to get bad behavior
[Guest]: and etc.
[Guest]: I think structurally states try to do this through the checks and balances and the sort
[Guest]: of division of power. It doesn't work in some parts of the world. I don't think it's working
[Guest]: here where the in, in many ways, our division is less stronger than that in the US because
[Guest]: you've got the legislatures merged with the executive more or less. But the judiciary,
[Guest]: I think it's difficult for strong and charismatic leaders to keep them out of out of either
[Guest]: meddling with the judges or making sure that they bend to his will. And I think that it's
[Guest]: there is a systemic problem here, which is which goes beyond him, that if you have people
[Guest]: like PK Mishra and the rest, who are willing to do this, not just for 22 years, for 20
[Guest]: years, it means that it's not just the person who's doing the damage. Speaking to intent,
[Guest]: I think it doesn't exist, right? What is it? I mean, you can't, it doesn't mean anything.
[Guest]: And it means something only to the person who actually expresses it. He believes he's
[Guest]: doing it in good intent. But I'm saying that the the follow up to that is if if that is
[Guest]: the case, you have to learn from the thing that you did in the past. If you continue
[Guest]: that good intent into your next project, you should bring the learnings of the past he
[Guest]: doesn't, it's still going to be locked down at four hours notice, it's still going to
[Guest]: be trauma for millions and still going to be moving on from there saying I did a very
[Guest]: good job. That is not a good intent.
[Amit Varma]: And more than that, I think the lesson from something like demonetization, that you can
[Amit Varma]: take out if you realize it's a mistake, is not that don't demonetize again, that's not
[Amit Varma]: the lesson. The lesson is have humility, talk to experts, take your time, you know, all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: The world is complex, it's not simple. I think that that is the lesson, but that is not going
[Guest]: to be learned. Because the style is the same when he's sworn in in 2019. There are newspaper
[Guest]: reports that says that he's clubbed ministries into three groups, each of which has 10 minutes
[Guest]: to give him a sort of, you know, a presentation. And you've got a fertilizer sitting with railways
[Guest]: and you know, a foreign and they all have, you know, 10 minutes to put their slides up.
[Guest]: So no lesson was learned, not only in the period in in Gujarat, but after demonetization
[Guest]: in the five years full for first five full years of his first term, don't know if the
[Guest]: word is done here. His first five years in office as a PM, nothing is learned, the style
[Guest]: is still the same. Everything is the same is the same people as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and we mentioned useful idiots. I'm just reminded at your recent Twitter outburst
[Amit Varma]: against Mr. Jay Shankar. So on a sideline, this I love this Twitter voice that you've
[Amit Varma]: kind of adopted, you know, how did it kind of come about? Because it seems to be to be
[Amit Varma]: almost an art form on its own. This kind of masterful parodying and it's perfect for Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you did a longer thing with this, it wouldn't work, it would be too much work.
[Guest]: Some people say book, it doesn't work as a book. So I think we have this wonderful nation
[Guest]: and a wonderful culture where we are half bilingual in two languages, many of us would
[Guest]: neither read and speak or write one language properly, the one that we were born into,
[Guest]: or the one that we learned at school. And we tend to mispronounce words, we tend to
[Guest]: use grammar and syntax in a particular way. I like that. And so I sort of enjoy that thing.
[Guest]: It's I don't look down on it in many way. But the fact is that a lot of us recognize
[Guest]: it, this would make no sense to anybody in say, New Zealand or another, you know, Anglophone
[Guest]: nation, because this is us, this is the way that we that you know, Punjabis and Tamilians
[Guest]: speak the language and write it. So yeah, so I use it mostly to entertain myself. How
[Guest]: did it come to be? I don't know. I think my, my most happy years in journalism were a were
[Guest]: in a tabloid, either while I was working in the tabloid or when I was writing for it.
[Guest]: And I think that lowbrow humour, which is the only real humour to my mind, appeals to
[Guest]: me a lot. I like stuff that is considered stupid, or that you know, some people might
[Guest]: actually consider silly. Yeah, no. And so that's, that's how, that's how I do it. I,
[Guest]: it can't be made into a book, there is no scope, there's no depth. It's a moment, basically.
[Guest]: And I think for that reason, I think it works on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's brilliant. And to me, it's lowbrow at the same time, I would say it's high art.
[Amit Varma]: I just kind of love it. One of the literally, you know, I'm not trying to flatter you. But
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I've most enjoyed over Twitter in the last 12 years, that I've kind of been
[Guest]: I knew that it would be a complete addiction for me. I didn't venture into it till I left
[Guest]: my till my term at Amnesty was over, I didn't touch it. There was a handle in my name, but
[Guest]: it was being operated by somebody in the office. So the December Shaheen Bagh, when that happened,
[Guest]: my term ended on the last day of November. And in 15 days time, the world had changed,
[Guest]: right? You had like, mass protests for the first time on this issue. And that has remained
[Guest]: for two and a half years, thank God. And I knew that and the reason I didn't come on
[Guest]: social media was I knew that such great technology. It's such a fabulous tool, that you can't
[Guest]: stay away from it. And I'm glad I stayed away from it. And I'm glad I'm now completely,
[Guest]: you know, immersed in it. It's a, it's a tool, I think that it gives, it gives us a dog in
[Guest]: the fight, like with what has happened to mainstream media, and maybe we can speak about
[Guest]: that. Structurally, it has taken itself out of the space that it was, and it's not going
[Guest]: to return anytime soon. If it can in many sort of places like a print, it never will.
[Guest]: So what do you do then I'm saying that you need to have some place where you put however
[Guest]: small the reach may be, there has to be some space for us to be able to express ourselves.
[Guest]: And I think that for many countries, including us, the social media in a time of authoritarian
[Guest]: government has been the single one release more than sort of opposition politics or the
[Guest]: judiciary, which has given us a voice to look at the number of Muslims who are active on
[Guest]: Twitter in India, talking about things that matter to us. It's fantastic. It's also disproportionate.
[Guest]: It does, it shows many things about our country in data terms, which might not be visible,
[Guest]: or might be hidden by the kind of appraisal lavish on our constitution and what kind of
[Guest]: nation we are. The reality comes out fairly, fairly vividly on social media.
[Amit Varma]: There's a thread or link which I saw on Twitter recently, which just made me very sad. It's
[Amit Varma]: like heartbreaking. You must have seen it. I think Joy Das put out a thread.
[Guest]: I did see it. Him asking Muslims, when were you first told to go to Pakistan or something
[Amit Varma]: like that?
[Guest]: And it's a long, long thread. You just scroll forever. You just scroll forever and forever
[Amit Varma]: and forever. And there is story after story after story. Let's talk about the media because
[Amit Varma]: that's in any case what I was coming to next. And it strikes me that it's like journalism
[Amit Varma]: is splintered and gone in two directions. And one direction is you become Godi Media
[Amit Varma]: and you have a whole chapter on that. And we'll discuss the reasons for that. And the
[Amit Varma]: other direction is that you have a handful of folks who are still fighting the good fight.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people like News Minute and Wire and Scroll and all of that, who are still
[Amit Varma]: trying to kind of put up a front and news laundry. And the question here is that we
[Amit Varma]: seem to have reached a stage where good journalism almost has to be a crusade, where it is only
[Amit Varma]: people with that crusader spirit who can still do the good journalism. You know, I would
[Amit Varma]: have imagined that in an ideal world, in an ideal state of equilibrium, there is an understanding
[Amit Varma]: of what journalism is, where people are, you know, they're reporting the first draft of
[Amit Varma]: history, they're reporting local news, they're doing the entertainment things, and they're
[Amit Varma]: speaking truth to power and all of these things are happening. But we've reached a stage where
[Amit Varma]: you either have the so called Godi Media, where you're just propelling one particular
[Amit Varma]: narrative being, you know, one of the front lines in the narrative wars that are out there.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have a bunch of people who are kind of holding firm on the other side. And
[Amit Varma]: it makes me sad because I don't think that to be a good journalist, you should have to
[Amit Varma]: be a good crusader. However, you know, in modern times, it seems that like, to me, journalism
[Amit Varma]: and activism should not go together, they simply should not. But it seems that it's
[Guest]: being forced in that direction.
[Guest]: I think structurally, what has happened is that like, when when you and I worked in newsrooms,
[Guest]: you would the material would transition from being collected, reportage, edited, and then
[Guest]: opined upon that's the last stage, very few people do that, right. But that is a natural
[Guest]: transition. And that is what we do that is that is that is how that's what journalists
[Guest]: do. And this is legitimate. And this is the way that the newsroom is structured. What
[Guest]: happens when the evidence is in when the evidence is in, if it leads to opinion, where there
[Guest]: is no difference being made, I think activism comes after to the right of that. So you've
[Guest]: got reportage, you've got the editing, you've got the opinion. Then after that, what if
[Guest]: I have the data with me, if I have the information, if the violation is manifest, it's in front
[Guest]: of my eyes, then what do I do? Do I continue doing steps one, two and three? Or is there
[Guest]: a legitimate fourth step for me? Our discomfort lies in the fact that in our classical newsrooms,
[Guest]: this fourth step doesn't really exist. In many newsrooms it did, it did in a different
[Guest]: form. So in Deccan Chronicle, which I worked for a long time ago, the editor would regularly
[Guest]: file PILs. So once the once something was known and on issues maybe as mundane as you
[Guest]: know, power or something like that, I don't know. But often the paper would be a litigant.
[Guest]: So that is that is actually activism, but it was rare. Does it seem unnatural that a
[Guest]: paper should do that? Looking at it from here, I would say no, that because the paper seems
[Guest]: to believe that it's a community of readers, right that ended. So I don't think we should
[Guest]: be as uncomfortable with it as we are. I'm not because I've, you know, transitioned into
[Guest]: activism full time, and I no longer see myself as a journalist. But I would urge journalists
[Guest]: to look at our classical structure and the movement of material within the newsroom and
[Guest]: ask ourselves whether it is legitimate to have that fourth step. I would say yes, for
[Guest]: sure that it is there is no running away from the fact that once you've got the evidence,
[Guest]: and you've put out the opinion, and there is no shift, it is fine for me to act to try
[Amit Varma]: and bring about that shift. And, you know, one of the things that you've remarked upon,
[Amit Varma]: and which has been a very sad case for so long, is that when it comes to influencing
[Amit Varma]: media, the government has a very powerful stick, you forget that. And the very powerful
[Amit Varma]: stick is government advertising that so many media houses and newspapers and magazines
[Amit Varma]: depend upon government advertising for survival. And this is to me is something that I feel
[Amit Varma]: is incredibly sad, because it raises the question that if journalism is valuable, like, I'm
[Amit Varma]: kind of idealistic in the sense that I believe that if there is anything of value, it should
[Amit Varma]: be a it should be possible to make a profit from it. Right. So even this podcast, I don't
[Amit Varma]: think of it in, you know, NGO terms that someone needs to support it. I'm like, No, if I'm
[Amit Varma]: doing something of value, I'll figure out a way that I make money from it, and I survive
[Amit Varma]: through it. And therefore, I think that if journalism is valuable, and I believe it is,
[Amit Varma]: then there has to be a way for it to also be profitable. So you can, you know, so at
[Amit Varma]: least on this one front, that government advertising, you can just tell the government to get lost,
[Amit Varma]: and you can kind of survive. And therefore, I think that not enough thought has, like
[Amit Varma]: either it is not possible, which would be either journalism so far is not valued by
[Amit Varma]: enough people, which to me would seem very sad, or we have sort of been lax in figuring
[Amit Varma]: out ways to monetize the value that we are providing for the people. Now, I know people
[Amit Varma]: like you know, News Laundry is experimenting with subscriber models, you know, the wire
[Amit Varma]: invites contributions, I think scroll does that also. So all those things are there and
[Amit Varma]: they're nascent experiments. But at a larger level, it just feels to me that somewhere,
[Amit Varma]: there was an ecosystem that didn't build up properly, because the point of the matter
[Amit Varma]: is people spend people back in the day would spend a lot of time reading a newspaper time
[Amit Varma]: is money. That means you're already paying to read the newspaper. Why is there not a
[Amit Varma]: way for the newspaper to then capture some of that?
[Guest]: So I think structurally, the one of the shifts that happened over the last 20 years is that
[Guest]: because of the idea of sort of India shining and India being the next China, a lot of money
[Guest]: went into setting up new media, particularly TV channels. So listeners might or might not
[Guest]: know that there are a handful, I think, five or six, 24 seven news channels in the US,
[Guest]: which are supported mostly through cable subscriptions. There are more than 100 news channels in India,
[Guest]: where not only do you not get a cable subscription, the channel needs to pay a carriage fee to
[Guest]: Tata Sky or to the cable operator. What happens in that situation is two things. One is you've
[Guest]: got a system where it's not easy to kill a business. You can survive by not paying employees
[Guest]: or paying them half their salaries or delaying their salaries in a way that you couldn't
[Guest]: do in a more civilized nation where the rule of law would say that if you don't pay, you
[Guest]: go to court and then you're shut down and you go bankrupt. The other is the dependency
[Guest]: on advertising, which has caused once again, two shifts. One is that the union government
[Guest]: gives out between itself and PSUs 2,400 crore rupees a year to what is called the DAVP,
[Guest]: a direct rate of audiovisual publicity, which as you say, is a discretionary money. And
[Guest]: you might think of it as a carrot, but you're right, it's actually a stick. That if you
[Guest]: don't do the line and you know what the line is, then you don't get that money. And that
[Guest]: happens all the time, including with the largest newspapers of states, including Rajasthan
[Guest]: Batrika, which had to go to court against the Sindhia government, or it all happened
[Guest]: with Denik Bhaskar, as like happened after the photographs and the reportage on the corpses
[Guest]: in the Ganga. So, structurally speaking, we have too many, too much media, which can't
[Guest]: be sustained by the size of the market we have. One problem is obviously the old one,
[Guest]: which is that the rates, the newspaper costs much less than it takes to produce. And so,
[Guest]: it is subsidized by the advertiser. But to a very large extent, the problem has been
[Guest]: that advertising has also been squeezed because of the problems with the economy. And the
[Guest]: fact that the government of India is very, very powerful, not just with the stick of
[Guest]: advertising, but also with the stick of regulation. It has switched off this TV channel, the only
[Guest]: one owned by Muslims in India, called MediaOne. It has denied a license to probably the best
[Guest]: known journalist around the world, who is from India, Raghav Bail, didn't get a license.
[Guest]: So, you've got a government that's enthusiastic and willing to exercise the agency that it
[Guest]: has. And so, we will have this problem. And will it go away soon? I don't think so. I
[Guest]: think that unless a lot of media dies, and a lot of media deserves to die, we are going
[Guest]: to have channels that are dependent on the government, both for regulatory sticks and
[Guest]: for the advertising carrot strokes a stick. And we will have a small number of not mass
[Guest]: reach outfits, such as the ones you named, which will be doing the journalism at the
[Guest]: other end. The problem is reportage. That my last job in a newspaper, which was some
[Guest]: time ago, was in a language newspaper, which had 300 reporters just in one state. And these
[Guest]: reporters had beats. So, for listeners who don't really know what journalism is like
[Guest]: most journalists on reporting are reporters and they go, they do the same thing over and
[Guest]: over again every day. When I was a Sessions Court reporter, I went to Sessions Court number
[Guest]: one, went up to number 42, then went back to one, went up to 42, and then went back
[Guest]: to the office. So, I knew what was going on there. Those who do civic, which is the corporation
[Guest]: beat, will know what's going on there, will know whether there are teachers in a school
[Guest]: or not. That's not what TV journalism does. That's not what these websites that you mentioned
[Guest]: can do, they don't have the resource. They can do some stories, they can do reportage.
[Guest]: Reportage can only be done by newspapers, because that's the only material that is not
[Guest]: dependent on visual narrative. You can't do court stories on a TV channel, even if you
[Guest]: wanted to. And it deploys large numbers of people to get actual news out. Newspapers
[Guest]: are dying. So, the latest data shows that 2021, 2020, obviously was less, the share
[Guest]: of revenue was less than it was in 2019. But the same has remained the case in 2022. That
[Guest]: in a year when we are speaking of a 9% GDP growth rate, newspapers will have exactly
[Guest]: the same sum of money that they had five years ago. That's why newspapers are shutting down.
[Guest]: That's why the Mumbai Mirror does not really exist. Though it had a very large reach, it
[Guest]: could not attract enough advertising to keep it in the black. Not just that, many, many
[Guest]: newspapers around the country have gone, more will go. What will go with them is reportage.
[Guest]: And I think what will remain is what we call debate. And I think that, to my mind, can't
[Guest]: be fixed. Because even if you have a few good, meaningful outfits, like the ones you named
[Guest]: Scroll, The Wire, The News Minute, they don't have the resources to be able to do this,
[Guest]: send out 3,500 reporters across the country. And so we will only have debate.
[Amit Varma]: I think the open question is there that do enough people value this kind of reportage?
[Amit Varma]: And if they do, then, you know, is there a way for this kind of value to be expressed
[Amit Varma]: in a way that causes something new structurally to come up so the reportage can happen?
[Guest]: So I want a life that's not particularly complex. So as a reporter, it's not easy for me to
[Guest]: conceive though this has been done and has been done successfully. In places like Chhattisgarh,
[Guest]: where you got a reporter with a WhatsApp group, which gives him 50 bucks a month where he
[Guest]: makes sufficient money out of it to be able to run that WhatsApp group and do his work.
[Guest]: So it is possible. But for most of us, it's the idea of okay, give me a space to sit,
[Guest]: give me a fan over my head, and then I can come to office and do my work and then go
[Guest]: back home and I don't have to worry about the other stuff. That's that's most of us.
[Guest]: So while it's possible that some things will come and replace as has I think The Wire and
[Guest]: News Minute and all do a bit of that. But the volume is too big. One newspaper in one
[Guest]: state 300 reporters think of that, that kind of resource is you can't just duplicate that.
[Guest]: And that's just one newspaper, there were three of that size. Yeah, I fear for what
[Amit Varma]: what is to come.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode ages ago with Ashok Malik, where he also pointed to another structural
[Amit Varma]: problem. And that explains why so much of TV news channels are just so terrible. And
[Amit Varma]: that was price controls that the government put price controls on how much you could ask
[Amit Varma]: the user directly for. And what that led to was that TV stations and TV channels and all
[Amit Varma]: of that would depend way more on advertising than on subscription. And that also means
[Amit Varma]: that niches become difficult, like I forget the exact proportion 7030 or whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: it was the converse of what it was in the US, for example. And if you're allowed to
[Amit Varma]: charge subscribers what you want, and if subscribers value a certain thing, you can go into niches,
[Amit Varma]: you can do your little things. But if it's only advertising, then you chase the lowest
[Amit Varma]: common denominator, and the lowest common denominator is what it is. And you in fact
[Amit Varma]: have a section in your book where, you know, you talk about why TV has become more strident
[Amit Varma]: and you kind of give a number of reasons. And is that something that surprises you?
[Amit Varma]: Because there was a time where you know, when television news first came up, it was respectable,
[Amit Varma]: it was, you know, it was sort of a audio visual version of what you saw in the newspapers
[Guest]: and all of that. I mean, but it wasn't competing against any other channel. Yeah. The problem
[Guest]: is that with this boom that we saw, after India shining a lot of money on the equity
[Guest]: side coming into media, channels have to compete, compete for what they have to compete for
[Guest]: money, obviously, how does the money come in, the money comes in through a system where
[Guest]: data is collected to show which shows and which channels have the most viewers, how
[Guest]: do you get the most viewers, then that is the question. The good thing about television
[Guest]: is that unlike newspapers, the feedback loop is pretty good. Like no newspaper editor outside
[Guest]: of the tabloid world can tell what story works and what doesn't work because most newspapers
[Guest]: are subscription tabloids for the most part in the West are sold on the street. Television
[Guest]: gets a rating fairly regularly. So, they know what stories work, what stories didn't work.
[Guest]: The problem with following the rating system is that you get skewed towards entertainment
[Guest]: more than you do towards news. Newspapers can avoid that structurally because there
[Guest]: is no real pressure on them, leaving the tabloids aside to put the sort of, you know, entertaining
[Guest]: material up front. So, they tend to remain sort of boring, in a sense, a good sense,
[Guest]: in structural terms. TV has exactly the opposite that the structure forces it to become entertaining.
[Guest]: And once you go down that road, you're not going to come out of it. The fear of God is
[Guest]: put into those top three, four sort of editors, managing editors, or whatever you call them.
[Guest]: Most of them are also anchors, I think, who get the ratings each week and look at where
[Guest]: they are placed. And so, the pressure is on them to make it even more demented than it
[Guest]: is, which is why it's gone the way it has so quickly.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I remember circa 2008, 2009, we called to these TV panels and all that and
[Amit Varma]: I've come on Annab show a couple of times back in the day. Thankfully, nothing on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: exists of that, but he was so normal then, you know, not the sort of raging lunatic he
[Amit Varma]: later kind of began. My next question is that, you know, what are your insights on the kind
[Amit Varma]: of things that people want to consume? Because it's not, you know, in terms of where TV news
[Amit Varma]: has gone, it's not just a partisanship that is bothering. It's gone into unhinged territory
[Amit Varma]: like after Sushant Singh Rajput died, right? The kind of conspiracy theories that came
[Amit Varma]: up the kind of victimization of Rhea Chakraborty. And of course, social media was a little worse
[Amit Varma]: because you had crazy conspiracy theories. And I could tell you about some of them, but
[Amit Varma]: on even on television, you know, there seems to be this appetite for I mean, and that's
[Amit Varma]: obviously why those channels go in these directions, there are feedback loops, and they realize
[Amit Varma]: this is what people want, and they give them more of the same. And they go much further
[Amit Varma]: in this direction than you know, they otherwise would, or maybe then even what the audience
[Amit Varma]: decides at that time, and it just becomes a downward spiral. So what is it that people
[Amit Varma]: really want? Like, do you think there is a reasonable constituency for what you would
[Amit Varma]: call good journalism or good news or so on? Or do you think we just all the time want
[Amit Varma]: to be entertained with outrageous narratives that get our dopamine going and all of that?
[Guest]: So I think that there are a few things here. I think one is that all of us surely want
[Guest]: at some point to receive material which informs us about the world that we are living in.
[Guest]: We don't want to be fed material that is bad. So it stands to reason that I want to be told
[Guest]: that this is going on. I might choose to dismiss it or I might choose to not act on it, but
[Guest]: I want it right. Which is why one goes to news. So there is obviously a constituency.
[Guest]: The question is then why is that constituency not being reflected in the material? I would
[Guest]: say two things. One is what I referred to in terms of the structural problems that lead
[Guest]: channels to chasing advertising money over subscription money, and that leads them automatically
[Guest]: into a cycle of moving towards entertainment. The other is I think that the sort of bread
[Guest]: and circuses thing which the ringmaster is controlling and wants material to be pushed
[Guest]: in a particular direction is successful. So you've got the government saying that this
[Guest]: is the kind of thing that there are WhatsApp groups in case listeners didn't know, where
[Guest]: the editors and the reporters of various beats are linked to the government and the government
[Guest]: tells them. The government tells anchors what to do. The day the CBI chief was raided and
[Guest]: he was replaced was the same day that the amnesty office was raided in Bangalore. And
[Guest]: I know this because the anchors called me and told me, they said that our lead story
[Guest]: is going to be the amnesty thing and not the CBI problem. That's what they are told to
[Guest]: do. I foresee some change in this. And I think that change will be externally influenced.
[Guest]: And in small measure, because of what has been done to the economy, and in some measure,
[Guest]: because of the problems of too many channels, many will go. The issue then will remain if
[Guest]: you've got people like Ambani controlling the media, which he does, he's got fingers
[Guest]: in many pies. Will that mean that the channel will continue doing what it's doing even without
[Guest]: any kind of pressure on say revenue? I don't know. But I do believe that along with my
[Guest]: sense that this kind of politics can only continue for so long, where external changes
[Guest]: forced upon you. I think this kind of journalism can be done only for so long that you will
[Guest]: either have a very strong counter, which is successful, both in the sense of reach and
[Guest]: in terms of money, which we don't have at the moment, or you will be forced to shut
[Guest]: and for lack of an audience that wants too much of this stuff. So I think that the future
[Guest]: is pretty good. The near future might not be as good.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just as in the context of what we were talking earlier about the politics and
[Amit Varma]: society and I keep going back to this quote by Andrew Breitbart, where he said politics
[Amit Varma]: is downstream of culture. And I think there is, you know, something to that. And in a
[Amit Varma]: similar sense, I think here, what the kind of content that people want to view and consume
[Amit Varma]: will drive what people provide. And I think what they want to consume and so on, is what
[Amit Varma]: is disturbing. Like ages ago, I had an informal chat with Pratik Sinha, it wasn't on a podcast
[Amit Varma]: or something, not in the episode we did together. It was in the sidelines of something. And
[Amit Varma]: he pointed out about how he had come across this fake news about some minister or the
[Amit Varma]: other. And he did his usual forensic genius on it, and figured out where it came from.
[Amit Varma]: And that, you know, wrote a post about how it originated with this person and this person
[Amit Varma]: kind of propagated it. And a little while after he publishes that, he gets a WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: message from this guy saying, I am so and so person who started that thing, can I please
[Amit Varma]: call you? So the guy calls him and it's some 16 year old kid or 15 year old kid somewhere
[Amit Varma]: in a village. And he's not part of any IT cell, not part of any misinformation campaign.
[Amit Varma]: But he's just put out, he started a website, he wants hits, what does he do for hits? He
[Amit Varma]: tries various things, he throws things at the wall, as we should all do. And he finds
[Amit Varma]: out that the kind of content which gets hits is this kind of rubbish. And then he goes
[Amit Varma]: all out into this. And this is what kind of gathers the thing. So when you say that this
[Amit Varma]: kind of journalism won't continue, I would say that if there is an appetite for it, and
[Amit Varma]: the evidence seems to suggest that there is, then first that appetite has to diminish and
[Amit Varma]: there has to be an appetite for some other kind of journalism before it ceases.
[Guest]: So I think that a critical word here is journalism, that will this die off by itself? I don't
[Guest]: think so. This will remain. What will be journalism when it, right now, this is what passes for
[Guest]: news as well as what it is, which is mostly nonsense. Will there be, is it possible that
[Guest]: there is a large enough constituency of people who to say that I don't want this, I want
[Guest]: something else, and I'm willing to pay for it and make it viable? I'm saying that the
[Guest]: answer to that is yes, it's too large a nation. And I don't think the time is too far off.
[Guest]: The issue will be about the person who owns it. Can you have people who control the economy
[Guest]: in large measure, control the advertising in large measure? Will they let something
[Guest]: like this exist with their platforms, knowing that this is producing material that's going
[Guest]: against their own interests? I don't know. But I don't think this is sustainable. And
[Guest]: I think the reason it's not sustainable is that it is not stable. It is deteriorating.
[Guest]: It's getting nastier. It's getting more vicious. There has to be an end. There is some end
[Amit Varma]: point there, which I think will come soon. Yeah, and I actually share the optimism that
[Amit Varma]: there are enough people who want a certain kind of good journalism that they'll pay for
[Amit Varma]: it. And one doesn't know if it will reach the scale where you can have 3000 reporters
[Amit Varma]: in a state. But at least I am optimistic about the likes of the people we named, for example,
[Amit Varma]: kind of surviving and getting by. But then again, the sticks of the state as it were,
[Amit Varma]: come into play where you know, you might be, you know, I think Dhanya Rajendran of the
[Amit Varma]: News Minute tweeted a few days before we are recording this about how there were income
[Amit Varma]: tax rates on whatever and the kind of trauma. I mean, the process is really the punishment
[Amit Varma]: and you see the brave people who are kind of standing up and saying we'll continue to
[Guest]: do this, but I'm sure it has a chilling effect. You have to internalize the fact that if you're
[Guest]: going to dissent, you will be in trouble. What degree of trouble will depend on how
[Guest]: much you dissent and how much stick the state can bring against you. But there is no way
[Guest]: that this government will let you exist without trauma, because it is really malicious and
[Guest]: really active and willing and sort of enthusiastic about using the powers that it has.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about dissent then. You know, the last chapter of our Hindu Rashtra is called
[Amit Varma]: how to fight it, right? And elsewhere, I have seen you tweet, quote, protest is a craft,
[Amit Varma]: stop good. So tell me about that. Because you're like, if there's one thing that gave
[Amit Varma]: me optimism and filled me with hope, it's all the anti-CAA protests, which were absolutely
[Amit Varma]: remarkable and inspiring for so many different reasons, the women of Shaheen Bagh, the young
[Amit Varma]: people holding up the preamble of the constitution, this otherwise boring, unreadable document,
[Amit Varma]: and that kind of fills you with hope. So when you say protest is a craft, what do you mean
[Guest]: by that?
[Guest]: So activism has professionals in it, who have worked on something for a long time. And as
[Guest]: you and I know, when you're in the newsroom for a long time, or when you're in a podcast
[Guest]: studio for a long time, you know something more about it than I do. I might be naturally
[Guest]: sort of gifted, I might be intelligent in many ways, but I don't know the things that
[Guest]: you do, because I haven't done them. Protest is about showing up, obviously, and saying
[Guest]: what it is that you want to say, how do you do that? Is the craft. To give you an example
[Guest]: of how craft can manifest itself is that Greenpeace uses jumpers of very high places to unfurl
[Guest]: banners, which are very spectacular, that is craft. So there is a technique about how
[Guest]: to go about doing it, and what you do to make sure that it is enjoyable, participative,
[Guest]: joyous, which makes it in the long term, effective. So that's one. The second is protest is part
[Guest]: of civil society, just like a corporate office will function on outcomes. The outcome in
[Guest]: a corporate in the office might be the quarterly profit or whatever the volume manufactured.
[Guest]: Rights groups will have outcomes based on changes in laws and policies by the state.
[Guest]: So they will have something called a power mapping, where they will map who they need
[Guest]: to shift to be able to get the issue to move towards them. And they will do it in various
[Guest]: ways. So there is a lot of craft involved, you need to be able to know things that the
[Guest]: others don't, and you need to be able to apply that knowledge to bring about that change.
[Guest]: It's not just a large number of people saying this, that or the other. So if we look at
[Guest]: the success of Shaheen Bagh, there are two, three things in that they were able to do,
[Guest]: which came to them naturally. We have ghettoized our Muslims fully in this country. Because
[Guest]: of that, the women were able to have safe spaces where they could spend all day and
[Guest]: all night. Because of the same fact, they were able to replicate it. That it's just
[Guest]: a sit-in. It's in our mahala. This is what you do. You sleep the night here. In the evenings,
[Guest]: we'll have people come and talk to us, there'll be people singing, we will dancing and so
[Guest]: on. In the afternoon, there'll be very few people, but it'll still be occupied. There
[Guest]: is that it becomes a template that you can replicate. But you can only do that if you
[Guest]: have that template, it needs to be a good enough template. So for most of us protest
[Guest]: is seen as something which is easy, and it's done spontaneously and doesn't have too many
[Guest]: other sort of elements. That's not the case. It's part of a very, very structured, very
[Guest]: large set of things that activists do to be able to bring about change. That is what I
[Guest]: meant in saying that a protest is a craft. That's that's a tweet that got me into trouble.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know why. Twitter banned you. Sorry? Twitter banned you I think. They took me off.
[Guest]: There was a case filed against me. And the reason is, I said you know, protest is a craft
[Guest]: at the end of a tweet, which was retweeting something I think from the Baltimore Sun,
[Guest]: I think it was. But there was a bunch of people all masked all on the ground, saying, in unison,
[Guest]: I can't breathe, which is a great way of doing this is the kind of thing that TV that the
[Guest]: TV cameras will come to, which is what makes it a craft and you think about it in a sort
[Guest]: of way, which is sort of interesting, and the cameras will come. And I said that this
[Guest]: is what Adivasis and Muslims and Dalits and women should be doing in this country. So
[Guest]: this, the police commissioner told the BBC that I was trying to sort of, not his words,
[Guest]: but create mischief in a time of COVID, you know, protocols or some nonsense. I don't
[Amit Varma]: know. So yeah, I don't know you laugh about it, man, because it's just so stressful just
[Amit Varma]: to think about the kind of harassment that this can kind of result in and the process
[Amit Varma]: absolutely being the punishment. Can you give me more examples of protest being a craft,
[Amit Varma]: both in the context of organized protest, like when you're doing marches and all of
[Amit Varma]: this, and also in the context of unorganized protests, like, you know, many people listening
[Amit Varma]: to this might think that I can't go out on a march, maybe they're not even in India,
[Amit Varma]: I want to protest in other ways. How can I protest? So any concrete examples?
[Guest]: I've got a book coming out in a couple of months, hopefully in a couple of months, same
[Guest]: publisher. No, it's not. This is Harper Collins, India. It's called the anarchist cookbook.
[Guest]: It's a book on protest on why and how to protest. I'll give an example. So the gay community
[Guest]: in the United States was empowered and had an outcome in mind. De legitimize decriminalize
[Guest]: homosexuality and legalize gay marriage, right? What was the opposition? It was the conservatives
[Guest]: who said no gays in the army, no gay marriage, you know, homosexuality is an offense against
[Guest]: God, etc. So the campaigners said, we need to move the needle from no to yes, right?
[Guest]: And there are players here, the church is a player, the government, the president is
[Guest]: a player, the 500 or whatever it is, you know, congressmen and women, they have they are
[Guest]: all players. These are the states in which we need to get this fixed. These are the states
[Guest]: in which victories are easy. This is what we need to do in terms of the Supreme Court
[Guest]: to look at fundamentally. The campaign would look at how do we shift some of these people.
[Guest]: So this was, you know, thought about it and said that the opposite to gay marriage, the
[Guest]: narrative was family values. So the campaign that they built was sort of around how gay
[Guest]: marriages had the same family values that the non gay marriages that the sort of hetero
[Guest]: marriages had. And it worked, they were able to over and very quickly knock off the laws
[Guest]: and get themselves legitimized. Similarly, with Black Lives Matter. I think that in the
[Guest]: space of a very few weeks, an organized campaign which said that this was unacceptable, became
[Guest]: popularly accepted and the New York Times said that the majority of people shifted actually
[Guest]: after that campaign, where you had the very simple messaging that we are dying on the
[Guest]: street because of who we are. You stop that because our lives matter. That's it. There's
[Guest]: no other message. But very large numbers of people saying the same thing. So this is a
[Guest]: simpler, less technical sort of protest, but also works. Outcomes are actually achieved
[Guest]: because the policing system changes. That is the outcome that they seek. On a smaller,
[Guest]: that smaller level with like a protest on a rally and stuff, we need to be more creative.
[Guest]: So a lot of the really grassroots activists in India use a lot of music. So when you have
[Guest]: when you when the middle class, the sort of so called so middle class is shown in a protest
[Guest]: is normally the candlelight march or like, you know, a few for the for the majority.
[Guest]: The sad thing is that it's seen like something that's difficult to do. And so creativity
[Guest]: is outsourced. Not too many nations in the world have protests where the same banner
[Guest]: is held with the same placard is held by 50 people. You know, it's like going to a match
[Guest]: where people are saying Pepsi and for you know, it's like the same thing because somebody
[Guest]: else has made it and has just distributed it. It's much more effective if you have your
[Guest]: own. The US is very good with this, the UK also, where you've got everybody holding something
[Guest]: different. And everybody's thought put some thought in it. That's all you need. You don't
[Guest]: need anything else, but you stand out because of it. You can only think of this once you
[Guest]: start doing it. If you're not, if you've only been to a couple in your life, you're not
[Guest]: going to have the the idea thing. Okay, maybe I need to do something else to attract people
[Guest]: to what I'm saying. Yeah, that's that's why it's a craft. And it's not as simple as it
[Guest]: might look from the outside. And that's why also it's fascinating. I think that one of
[Guest]: the things the moment the young women showed up wearing the hijab, I knew that the government
[Guest]: would lose. We are talking at a time when it has not lost yet. And we are talking at
[Guest]: a time when it appears that the high court is going to rule against the women. It doesn't
[Guest]: matter. Because they have agency. That is the problem. Once you give an once you give
[Guest]: a community agency to push back against what you're doing to them, they will use it. You
[Guest]: might bash them down into not using it. But we don't we are not that much of a state that
[Guest]: you can't just if the women keep showing up at the gate, that's all they need to do nothing
[Guest]: else. They just need to show up the state will build this that this power. You can only
[Guest]: understand once you look at activism from the inside of organizations that approach
[Guest]: it with a technical sense. Yeah, and I think my years in amnesty is really fabulous in
[Guest]: terms of learning. I had no idea what the heck this they did or how they did it. But
[Guest]: learning that stuff as you might in a studio, or you might in a newsroom came to me while
[Amit Varma]: I spent my five years there. Speaking of gay marriage, I remember this classic article
[Amit Varma]: written by Andrew Sullivan in the early 90s. I think 92. He was an editor of Atlantic then
[Amit Varma]: called the conservative case for gay marriage, where he did exactly that where he reframed
[Amit Varma]: it in terms of family values and said every conservative should support gay marriage and
[Amit Varma]: Sullivan himself was gay. And I think that's a remarkable exercise in reframing that you
[Amit Varma]: want people to believe, you know, to support you in a certain way. And you frame it in
[Amit Varma]: a way that brings that support around. And I can't wait for that. And now the other part
[Amit Varma]: of my question, that this is all organized protest, formal protest in terms of craft,
[Amit Varma]: and I can't wait to read your book and figure out more about it. But informally, like anybody
[Guest]: listening to this says that, you know, what can I do is you are already doing stuff. So
[Guest]: what is it that we mean? By activism, we mean that you are engaging with state and society
[Guest]: to bring about some kind of outcome change, right? You're doing that through your vote
[Guest]: in any case, you're doing that through social media. You're doing that by sort of expressing
[Guest]: yourself on Facebook. The question is, how do you make it more effective? And that has
[Guest]: dual benefits, you become more prominent, because of the fact that you're doing something
[Guest]: which is amplified by sort of other people. And you're able to make sure that what you
[Guest]: want is actually the outcome is actually you know, made real. So that that is your figuring
[Guest]: out how to use and there are lots of people on social media right now who have figured
[Guest]: it out and are trying to do it. So you don't need to do anything other than continue using
[Guest]: social media, just make yourself slightly more effective, no matter whether your use
[Guest]: on social media is in favor of the BJP or the Hindutva or whatever, the same rules apply
[Guest]: to all of us. You need to be able to communicate what it is that you want to an end and that
[Guest]: end has to be the outcome change that you seek. Once you're clear about that, then you
[Guest]: can figure out what it is that works. And the best activism, I would say the most effective
[Guest]: activism tool that we have in the modern world is social media. For a long time, those of
[Guest]: us who are in activism believe that you need the people physically on the ground. And I
[Guest]: think Shainbhag and Afama show that that is true. But not all protests require mass mobilization
[Guest]: of that sort, because the because the demand on the sort of individuals is too high. You
[Guest]: can bring about change purely by using your own social media handle and your page slightly
[Guest]: more effectively than you than you are. And I'll give tips on how to.
[Amit Varma]: No, I did an episode a long time back, a couple of years back with Pranik Kotasane, where
[Amit Varma]: we spoke about what he called radically networked societies, where, you know, taking lessons
[Amit Varma]: from the Arab Spring and so on, and a combination of sort of in person protest and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: using them to using the internet to mobilize that. So I linked that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: But when you said you'd give tips or your tips are in the books,
[Amit Varma]: So it's not very communicable. Fair enough. So we've just got to wait for
[Amit Varma]: your book and let's be patient. It's not that far off. You mentioned amnesty. Tell me about
[Amit Varma]: your years in amnesty. Because before that, you were sort of a journalist, love for writing
[Amit Varma]: language, all of that, you do your journalism, you do it for, you know, a long time. And
[Amit Varma]: then you move to amnesty where you're now an activist and all of that. So what prompted
[Amit Varma]: that shift? And what are the kind of lessons you learned? In what ways did it change you?
[Guest]: So I was I moved to Bangalore in 2010, with the intention of retiring and sort of reading
[Guest]: and writing full time and so on, which I did for five years. And then I suspect amnesty
[Guest]: was not able to find anybody to run it because a salaries are pretty low in civil society
[Guest]: be because it's difficult work. Not difficult to work in the sense of the work itself, but
[Guest]: because of the government. I suspect this and I could be wrong. But when I was asked
[Guest]: whether I was sort of interested in the job, I felt immediately attracted to it. And I
[Guest]: think one reason was that after my years in Gujarat, and I was very dissatisfied towards
[Guest]: the end of my job as a tabloid editor, because I felt that there was something happening
[Guest]: in society that was not being captured out of Bombay and Delhi. What it was, I didn't
[Guest]: know. But I knew that there was something happening in terms of the sort of the communal
[Guest]: stuff. I had known Modi for some time, you know, before that, I knew that he would do
[Guest]: well in Delhi. And so I worked for a Gujarati paper, where of course, I was miserable, because
[Guest]: it there was no, no way that I could express the things that I wanted to say in the paper,
[Guest]: because the leadership is extremely conservative. And so that thing remained with me to some
[Guest]: extent that I feel that need to do something I didn't know what. And so when this thing
[Guest]: came along, I was I was happy to join, but I didn't know what the job was. And I didn't
[Guest]: realize it for some time, I was the least qualified person in that office, and I'm not
[Guest]: being modest. So there's very highly, there are three kinds of people who are in activism.
[Guest]: One is the journalist types who do the the evidence gathering. Often, these are not journalists,
[Guest]: but these are PhD scholars. So if you look at something deep, deeper, like, you know,
[Guest]: a climate change or coal mining in the Adivasi belt, there's somebody who studied this for
[Guest]: a long time and knows a lot of things about it. And the third types are lawyers. So they
[Guest]: all the material is looked at from the legal lens and cleaned up, they do the the editing
[Guest]: function of that, but they do it at a level of law rather than at the level of making
[Guest]: making it more readable. And I like obviously didn't fit into any of this. And nor was I
[Guest]: meant to I went there as a manager, like, I was I was the the guy who ran the place.
[Guest]: So I threw myself into fundraising, which is what I did, I raised that I raised money
[Guest]: to for the for the organization, and I would engage with the output, not from the active
[Guest]: point of view, but just observing what it is that did because there was so much better
[Guest]: than me at like what they did. That is where I learned that this is what it is that for
[Guest]: amnesty, especially the evidence gathering is the primary function. It is the quality
[Guest]: of the material three years into one research report, which is 50 pages long, like a really
[Guest]: intense verified doubly verified, if you're using somebody, that person has to sign a
[Guest]: document saying that it's okay for us to campaign on their behalf, and so on and so on the very
[Guest]: extremely complex newsrooms will lose their if they saw it, you know. And the once the
[Guest]: material is in it goes to campaigners, the campaigners are the ones who do that stuff.
[Guest]: Now those people, they might not even have gone to college. They're sitting in a room
[Guest]: with people who might have had a PhD, but they are they are both equally good at what
[Guest]: they do. The campaigner is operating out of experience, instinct and knowledge about what
[Guest]: it is that can be done. And it's not just about having an event. It's about figuring
[Guest]: out who the people are who will, who can shift this for us, and how it is that they can be
[Guest]: influenced, very rich to sort of learn and study and so on. And I've learned that this
[Guest]: is a, these are the sets of laws we have, I had no, I had no clue that things like the
[Guest]: coal bearing areas act sort of existed where the government can, without any resistance,
[Guest]: be able to take over the lands of sort of Adivasis from them, which it still does. Or
[Guest]: what exactly AFSPA was, and how it was enforced. All these things you learn only when you work
[Guest]: with them. And I think for me, the very rich learning experience of those five years has
[Guest]: has, you know, stayed with me, I don't really, I don't really desire working in a newspaper
[Guest]: anymore. I don't really care if my columns don't go away. In fact, I'm quite bored of
[Guest]: writing them, I write them because that's the only source of money I have at the moment.
[Guest]: But this stuff is like a magnet, it's like it draws me very powerfully. Yeah, and, and
[Guest]: I think it'll stay with me for, for the rest of my life.
[Guest]: Did it make you a different person?
[Guest]: It made me more aware of how dumb I was. And I think there are many jobs can do that. But
[Guest]: I'm saying that it made me more aware of how dumb I was, along with how to try and empathize
[Guest]: with somebody, which is, I think, very difficult for a job to do. Right? I think so, at least,
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know, I've done many jobs, and this has not done that to me. So the ability
[Guest]: to and being a newspaper editor, you're basically a tyrant, especially if you work in newspaper
[Guest]: organizations where the proprietor likes you and gives you the authority, which I had,
[Guest]: the Ansari's at midday, they never said anything to me. And I ran the newsroom like an absolute
[Guest]: tyrant in the wrong sense of the word that I dismissive of people, but here I was in
[Guest]: an office where when I when I spoke over somebody, they would not stop speaking, they would continue
[Guest]: speaking, which I was not used to. And they were half my age, perhaps, you know, so the
[Guest]: idea that you're dumb, and you shouldn't be doing dumb things can only come through a
[Guest]: lesson which is taught to you in that fashion, which I learned.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just thinking maybe we need to make Modiji work in Amnesty for a few years.
[Guest]: No, it's a great place. I love it. It's such a fabulous place and such such a great history.
[Guest]: So tough, like we had this, we had a report on where Amnesty refers to the Israeli treatment
[Guest]: of Palestinians inside of Israel as apartheid. And it's not easy to bring out such things
[Guest]: because we have a unit within that country and so on. But as a movement, it's phenomenal.
[Guest]: Amnesty is governance structure is democratic, so you vote for people. But because it's democratic,
[Guest]: it's the country called section in the Amnesty language that has the most members would have
[Guest]: more votes. So it was six votes, but because it was Europe based, the European sections
[Guest]: had most members 5 lakh 4 lakh 10 lakh paying us a sort of sum of money every month. So
[Guest]: they had more votes, six votes. And they were able to get their own stuff, you know, enforced
[Guest]: over they voluntarily gave up everybody went to one one nation, one vote voluntarily gave
[Guest]: up power. You don't see that in in too many places. You don't see that anywhere actually.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's, it's a great place, which I think should be taught about. I'm glad it
[Guest]: won its Nobel Peace Prize so long ago, 77, because the world instantly recognized that
[Guest]: this is you know, quality stuff, death penalty in Europe gone because of our torture, you
[Guest]: know, yeah, great stuff. What happened in India? In India, it started in 50 years ago,
[Guest]: when George Fernandes was was a member, it was very urban and remained so activists tend
[Guest]: to not be very good manager, I suspect one reason why I was asked to run it was that
[Guest]: there was okay, can you do the kind of the management bit side to it. So when you don't
[Guest]: have money, it just shuts. So there were four or five times before this time, that it came
[Guest]: and went each time the government would not like it. And each time it had to shut, not
[Guest]: go shut, because all the five times was run entirely, as was the case in my time as well
[Guest]: run by this is it was sort of Indians running. Amnesty is only a brand that is lent to a
[Guest]: group that is that generates itself. So in most nations, a set of people say, okay, we
[Guest]: will be the amnesty here. They apply for recognition, they're giving materials to campaign on they
[Guest]: can't just go and do their own stuff. They have to speak the same language as, as they
[Guest]: give a law, the law and policy unit. And so because of a lack of a lack of funding and
[Guest]: be a malicious government, and this is mostly the Congress, it was not able to survive.
[Guest]: And but this time around, I think we will not go, we will not we will not die, we will
[Guest]: we will be back. We are moving Supreme Court. In the next few days, we have actually moved
[Amit Varma]: it and we expect to be given relief. Well, good luck with that. Let's sort of turn to
[Amit Varma]: the personal because, you know, this is the second time we've met and both times we've
[Amit Varma]: met for recording episodes. All I know a few in a sense is that public face, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're writing your fearless twittering, and you're very entertaining twittering. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all of that, all of what we've talked about, like, like one question that really
[Amit Varma]: interests me with people that I talk to is, when you wake up in the morning, what are
[Amit Varma]: you looking forward to? What is like the texture of your day? What gives you peace and happiness
[Guest]: within a day? So I'll describe my day to you. I don't know what. So three days a week I
[Guest]: have yoga, which is at 830, which is for an hour. And I've been doing it for a few years
[Guest]: now. And you do it online on your own online now. He used to come home. But now now now
[Guest]: he no longer needs to which is fine. I think my yoga become better with with him on the
[Guest]: screen rather than him in. I don't know why. I write much less than I used to I write one
[Guest]: column for a bunch of newspapers and websites, which I write on Saturday, it takes me about
[Guest]: 40 minutes to write 750 850 words, 850 words is what I write 4045 minutes. But other than
[Guest]: that, there is no real work. So I don't do anything. So I wake up and I try and make
[Guest]: sure that I shave every day. I cycled a bit sometimes I read quite a lot. There's a lot
[Guest]: of books in my house. I read much less now than I used to because I'm on the on the iPad
[Guest]: or the phone a lot. And that's not only distracting, it's extremely entertaining. So there's no
[Guest]: reason for me to go and read Penguin Black Classics. But I am forced to read Penguin
[Guest]: Black Classics because I have a monthly column I do for the Hindu on on books from the ancient
[Guest]: world. So where I write about something that that I know about. But pretty much that's
[Guest]: it. That's there's no other that's I, I sort of you know, a potter about at home. And yeah,
[Guest]: it's it's very dull.
[Guest]: Does music play a big part in your life?
[Guest]: Not anymore. I had three phases. So I used to play with a band in Surat from the age
[Guest]: of 17 till when I left when I was 24 and came to Bombay. I played the guitar and I sang
[Guest]: and it was the usual stuff that Dylan and the Dire Straits and all that. Then there
[Guest]: was this after I married, I discovered Nusrat because my wife sort of introduced me to him.
[Guest]: And then suddenly I stopped listening to all that sort of music and only listen to Indian
[Guest]: music Kumar Gandharv, who I really love and Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan. And then after amnesty
[Guest]: or so then I that phase also went away there. I don't listen to music too much anymore.
[Guest]: I like YouTube videos a lot. So I'm on YouTube quite a bit through the day watching stuff
[Guest]: on rockets, guns, sometimes cars sometimes, but mostly about things like science and tech.
[Guest]: And I think this the smallness of the YouTube video helps that you could just spend five
[Amit Varma]: or seven minutes in it and still feel it's worth your while. Yeah, but yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Have you changed your notion of happiness or what you want to do over the years like
[Amit Varma]: when we are young and certainly in my case, when we are young, it's tied up with goals.
[Amit Varma]: I want to achieve this. I want to achieve that I want to achieve X. And I think beyond
[Amit Varma]: a certain point, there is no longer specific goals. It's, it's a kind of life that you
[Amit Varma]: want to live where you might be taking the joy in small things or you might just want
[Amit Varma]: to say that, you know, I want to, I want a life where I can just read without having
[Amit Varma]: to think of anything or whatever. I want to be in nature, different people will define
[Guest]: it differently. I have that. So basically, I figured out fairly early on that money was
[Guest]: not that important, that if you had a certain sum, and you were okay, that was fine, that
[Guest]: if you didn't really need too much money. And so at 40, I felt that that was done that
[Guest]: that I don't need to do this anymore. The thing about writing, and particularly writing
[Guest]: books is that there is no joy in it. The engagement levels are too high. So you can't really,
[Guest]: it's not misery. I'm talking about nonfiction, I have no idea what you know, writing fiction
[Guest]: is like, but it's not the kind of yeah, we're having a party kind of thing at all ever.
[Guest]: So but that is more rewarding, in a sense, the sense that you're doing something productive,
[Guest]: which I feel I'm doing on Twitter, as well, by the way, I feel that I'm doing some I don't
[Guest]: know what it is, because there's nothing there's no, there's no material output. There's some
[Guest]: time is being, you know, invested in something that is I feel I feel regret after I've sent
[Guest]: out tweet saying I should have rewritten that one word differently. I don't know why, because
[Guest]: who cares?
[Amit Varma]: No, I read that tweet by Sanjeev Sanyal, very misspelled plagiarism repeatedly. And for
[Guest]: a moment, I thought I would have spelled it differently than him because he was too close
[Guest]: to the original. You have to, like, phonetically break down a word. That's what makes it fun.
[Guest]: And then you have to drop out some words that the reader has to fill in. You know, that's
[Guest]: what makes it fun for them. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's it's masterful. But you know, so 10 years later, what do you see yourself doing?
[Guest]: Still writing books like this? Or would you know,
[Guest]: I'll be 62 in 10 years time. I don't know if so I'm, I've got one book, which is done,
[Guest]: which is out very soon. And I've got another book that I'm contemplating writing, which
[Guest]: doesn't mean anything. I don't maybe I'll never write it. But I have no plan beyond
[Guest]: that. I've been called to a few universities to lecture in April in the US not lecture
[Guest]: to speak to them. And if I get my passport back, which I hope to do next week, and if
[Guest]: I get a US visa, which I don't know if I will, then I'll be doing that. But that's as long
[Guest]: as I've planned for April.
[Amit Varma]: Good luck with the passport. I'll I've taken up a lot of your time very grateful that you
[Amit Varma]: you've so patiently sat through all of this. I'll end by asking you to give recommendations
[Amit Varma]: to me and everyone who's listening about books that you love could be something recent could
[Amit Varma]: be an old favorite, but which you feel really excited about sharing with the world. And
[Amit Varma]: equally, maybe some YouTube channels you've really enjoyed and that you're hooked to.
[Amit Varma]: And again, with music, something that is really close to your heart, something that you feel
[Amit Varma]: you'll still be listening to in 20 years time, that's a kind of comfort zone for you.
[Guest]: I read somewhere recently, and it sort of occurred to me that this was a very wise thing
[Guest]: that you shouldn't be listening to music you already know, you should be listening only
[Guest]: to new stuff. Because that what you're doing is a nursery rhyming of, I don't know whether
[Guest]: that's true in absolute terms. But I'm going to try that. Anyway, so books, don't buy anything,
[Guest]: because I'm saying it. But I think that if you can download it from libger or like, whatever
[Guest]: it is, consider reading the classics from the top down. So you start with the histories
[Guest]: of Herodotus very readable, because it's like, good fun, thick book refers to India, some
[Guest]: really fun bits about India. And then you go down from there, I'm saying that you to
[Guest]: try and go down as much as you can through the Greeks. So Plato is very readable. Aristotle
[Guest]: not so much. So Plato stuff is all dialogue. So the two people talking, some of it is very
[Guest]: moving and beautifully written. And there's a lot of it, you might think that it's just
[Guest]: as many books. So that's there. Aristotle, some of the interesting stuff, which is not
[Guest]: particularly difficult to read, a lot of it is quite difficult to read, is things like
[Guest]: poetics, which is a 50 page book on drama. And thus, and the nature and the structure
[Guest]: of drama. It's a beautiful book. Also, that he's got a lot of essays on the on the physical
[Guest]: world. So he's the first guy and I am quite struck that I didn't notice he says that birds
[Guest]: bend their elbows in the opposite direction from us, which is true. They went them thus.
[Guest]: So he's got, he's got some books which have this kind of observation. And then you've
[Guest]: got a lot of people who do doing either new platonic philosophy and all that you can skip.
[Guest]: But the dramatists are very important, important because the same storylines continue in Western
[Guest]: worlds today. So Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, there's not that much work. So you can go
[Guest]: through it pretty quickly. I read through the Greeks in a year. So when I moved to Bangalore
[Guest]: in 2011 or so, I spent a year going through the Greeks and then I moved to the Romans.
[Guest]: And I would say that you that a lot of the Romans, Julius Caesar, a phenomenal writer.
[Guest]: So the two books that he wrote, the War in Gaul or the Gallic War and the Civil War are
[Guest]: outstanding pieces of prose. It's the anti-Modi. There's almost no, he does refer to himself
[Guest]: in the third person only on the assumption that nobody knows who the author is. So he's
[Guest]: like, but beautiful. The Babarnama is also a terrific book. I'm just giving some random
[Guest]: names out of all those things. One book that Indira Gandhi really liked, and I really like
[Guest]: is called The Life of the Bee. It's by a guy called Materlink, M-A-E-T-L-I-N-C-K at the
[Guest]: end. It's a book on how the hive functions. Just like sort of, I think E.O. Wilson's done
[Guest]: the same thing with anthills, but this is a fabulous book. And I think that the good
[Guest]: thing about being so connected in a society is that we tend to receive such so many references
[Guest]: and be able to find out very quickly how to reach those. So I would suggest you spend
[Guest]: a lot of time on the net that just hang out on Twitter. I'm not on Facebook, so I don't
[Guest]: know how that goes. YouTube channels, I really like a channel called NASA Spaceflight. So
[Guest]: what they do is they have a set of volunteer reporters, almost volunteers, many of them
[Guest]: volunteers and like, you know, some of them full time that cover the space industry, which
[Guest]: is quite big in the US and has become much bigger in the recent past because of the entry
[Guest]: of the private firms. So Musk is building a rocket that he's trying to take to Mars,
[Guest]: which is waiting for the the environmental approval for to fly. So it might happen this
[Guest]: year might not go to Mars this year, but it'll start the testing and so on going into orbit.
[Guest]: Space is a very good subject to go to YouTube for because the number of people who do it
[Guest]: is a very few. With NASA Spaceflight, there's a guy called Scott Manley, who does space
[Guest]: as well from the technical point of view. So he's not from the science technical, but
[Guest]: from the sort of amateur technical point of view. These I find quite, quite interesting.
[Guest]: And I spend a lot of time with these. Yeah, music. I learned something, which I, I became
[Guest]: a member of the Symphony Orchestra of India, which is based out of the NCPA in Bombay,
[Guest]: 95% of the audience is Parsi, no phone ever goes off. I found it interesting that before
[Guest]: I observed a performance, I would go to YouTube and watch it once so that I could anticipate
[Guest]: what was going to happen. And I think that a lot of us tend to not be able to get into
[Guest]: this kind of music, because it's too unfamiliar the first time we we sort of listen to it,
[Guest]: whether it's this or jazz or whatever. So my suggestion is that if you that a you try
[Guest]: and listen to some of at least the more melodic bits, which I think you know, anything by
[Guest]: Beethoven, the fifth or the ninth or the second or so on, listen to it a couple of times to
[Guest]: figure out what comes after what in what sequence and then listen to it better, it'll make it
[Guest]: a much more pleasurable thing to listen to and less off putting because it seems really
[Guest]: a not familiar and B, because there's no sense of song, right? It's just going from one place
[Guest]: or to another. But to look at it as like a as watching a movie makes makes more sense.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned your Wilson, there's a great quote by him on communism, where he said great
[Amit Varma]: idea, wrong species. And he meant it would be great for ants. And he died. He died recently,
[Guest]: didn't he? He died recently. Yeah. And you mentioned Indira Gandhi reading about bees.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm wondering if she thought that the same principles could be applied to humans.
[Guest]: She was an interesting character field, all the family did not do well. So Jawaharlal
[Guest]: Nehru got a third class at Trinity. She failed, she did not get a degree. Rajiv went to Trinity,
[Guest]: he failed, he did not get a degree. Sanjay Gandhi obviously dropped out of high school,
[Guest]: Priyanka Gandhi didn't go to school. Rahul Gandhi and Varun Gandhi are the only ones
[Guest]: who actually got a properly studied. I don't know about the sister Priyanka. But what the
[Guest]: same principles of not having academic rigor that you would blame Modi for you could just
[Guest]: as easily apply. Sonia Gandhi did not study beyond high school. But see, here is the difference
[Guest]: that you understand that I have a problem, I'm going to rely on somebody who I think
[Guest]: is good. And then I'll go with what they say, I might actually, you know, interfere a lot
[Guest]: because that's what you know, human beings are and the nature of power is such that that
[Guest]: will happen. But for the most part, okay, this is something that you can take care of
[Guest]: better than me, which is not there here. So anyway, thanks a lot for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: For having me. It was a great pleasure. And I hope you get your passport back before Elon
[Guest]: Musk gets to Mars. I hope I will. I think that very good. The long future is always
[Guest]: good. And I think it will be good for us as well. And I think that we need to make sure
[Guest]: that the long future is not too far off by trying to be more active in the spaces that
[Guest]: we are and trying to bring that change about in whatever way we can.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy Aakar's books, Our Hindu Rashtra and Price of the Modi Years. You can
[Amit Varma]: follow Aakar on Twitter. In fact, you must follow Aakar on Twitter at Aakar underscore
[Amit Varma]: Patel. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. And you can browse past episodes of The Scene
[Amit Varma]: in the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.